\input texinfo
@setfilename dejagnu.info
@documentencoding us-ascii
@settitle DejaGnu
@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* DejaGnu: (dejagnu).           The GNU testing framework.
@end direntry

@node Top, Abstract, , (dir)
@top DejaGnu

@menu
* Abstract::
* Overview::
* Getting DejaGnu up and running::
* Running Tests::
* Customizing DejaGnu::
* Extending DejaGnu::
* Unit Testing::
* Reference::
* Unit Testing API::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Overview

* What is DejaGnu ?::
* New In This Release: Release Notes.
* Design Goals::
* A POSIX conforming test framework: A POSIX Conforming Test Framework.

Getting DejaGnu up and running

* Test your installation::
* Create a minimal project, e.g. calc: Create a minimal project; e_g_ calc.
* Our first automated tests::
* A first remote test::

Running Tests

* Make check: Make Check.
* Runtest::
* The files DejaGnu produces.: Output Files.

Customizing DejaGnu

* Local Config File::
* Global Config File::
* Board Config File::
* Remote Host Testing::
* Config File Values::

Extending DejaGnu

* Adding A New Testsuite: Adding a new Testsuite.
* Adding A New Tool::
* Adding A New Target::
* Adding A New Board::
* Board Config File Values: Board File Values.
* Writing A Test Case::
* Debugging A Test Case::
* Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite.: Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite.
* Hints On Writing A Test Case::
* Special variables used by test cases.: Test Case Variables.

Unit Testing

* What Is Unit Testing ?::
* The dejagnu.h Header File: The dejagnu_h Header File.

Reference

* Obtaining DejaGnu::
* Installation::
* Builtin Procedures::
* File Map::

Unit Testing API

* C Unit Testing API::
* C++ Unit Testing API::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Abstract, Overview, Top, Top
@chapter Abstract

This document describes the functionality of DejaGnu, the
testing framework of the GNU project. DejaGnu is written in
Expect, which uses
Tcl as a command
language. Expect acts as a very
programmable shell.  As with other Unix command shells, you can
run any program, but once the program is started, your test script
has programmable control over its input and output.  This does not
just apply to the programs under test; @code{expect}
can also run any auxiliary program, such as
@code{diff} or @code{sh}, with full
control over its input and output.

DejaGnu itself is merely a framework for the creation of
testsuites. Testsuites are distributed with each
application.

@node Overview, Getting DejaGnu up and running, Abstract, Top
@chapter Overview

@menu
* What is DejaGnu ?::
* New In This Release: Release Notes.
* Design Goals::
* A POSIX conforming test framework: A POSIX Conforming Test Framework.
@end menu

@node What is DejaGnu ?, Release Notes, , Overview
@section What is DejaGnu ?

DejaGnu is a framework for
testing other programs.  Its purpose is to provide a single
front end for all tests. Think of it as a custom library of
Tcl procedures crafted to support writing a test harness. A
@emph{Test Harness} is the testing
infrastructure that is created to support a specific program
or tool. Each program can have multiple testsuites, all
supported by a single test harness. DejaGnu is written in
Expect, which in turn uses
Tcl -- Tool command
language. There is more information on Tcl at the @uref{http://www.scriptics.com,Scriptics} web site and the
Expect web site is at @uref{http://expect.nist.gov,NIST}.

Julia Menapace first coined the term ``DejaGnu'' to describe
an earlier testing framework at Cygnus Support she had written
for @code{GDB}. When we replaced it with the
Expect-based framework, it was like DejaGnu all over again.
More importantly, it was also named after my daughter, @uref{http://www.welcomehome.org/deja/,Deja Snow Savoye}
(now 14 years old as of Feb 2004), who was a toddler
during DejaGnu's beginnings.

DejaGnu offers several advantages for testing:

@itemize 

@item
The flexibility and consistency of the DejaGnu
framework make it easy to write tests for any program, with
either batch oriented, or interactive programs.

@item
DejaGnu provides a layer of abstraction which
allows you to write tests that are portable to any host or
target where a program must be tested. For instance, a test
for @code{GDB} can run from any supported host
system on any supported target system. DejaGnu runs tests on
many single board computers, whose operating software ranges
from a simple boot monitor to a real-time OS.

@item
All tests have the same output format. This
makes it easy to integrate testing into other software
development processes. DejaGnu's output is designed to be
parsed by other filtering script and it is also human
readable.

@item
Using Tcl and Expect, it's easy to create wrappers
for existing testsuites. By incorporating existing tests under
DejaGnu, it's easier to have a single set of report analyse
programs..
@end itemize

Running tests requires two things: the testing framework and
the testsuites themselves. Tests are usually written in
Expect using Tcl, but you can also use
a Tcl script to run a testsuite that is not based on
Expect. Expect
script filenames conventionally use @emph{.exp} as a
suffix; for example, the main implementation of the DejaGnu test
driver is in the file
runtest.exp.)

@node Release Notes, Design Goals, What is DejaGnu ?, Overview
@section New In This Release

This release has a number of substantial changes over version
1.3. The most visible change is that the version of Expect and Tcl
included in the release are up-to-date with the current stable net
releases. The biggest change is years of modifications to the
target configuration system, used for cross testing. While this
greatly improved cross testing, it has made that subsystem very
complicated. The goal is to have this entirely rewritten using
iTcl by the next release. Other changes
are:

@itemize 

@item
More built-in support for building target binaries
with the correct linker flags. Currently this only works with
GCC as the cross compiler,
preferably with a target supported by
@ref{Libgloss}.

@item
Lots of little bug fixes from years of heavy
use at Cygnus Solutions.

@item
DejaGnu now uses
Automake for Makefile
configuration.

@item
Updated documentation, now in DocBook XML.

@item
Windows support. There is beta level support for
Windows that is still a work in progress. This requires the
@uref{http://www.cygwin.com/,Cygwin} POSIX
subsystem for Windows.
@end itemize

@menu
* Windows Support::
@end menu

@node Windows Support, , , Release Notes
@subsection Windows Support

To use DejaGnu on Windows, you need to first install the
@uref{http://www.cygwin.com/,Cygwin}
release. This works as of the B20.1 release. Cygwin is a POSIX
system for Windows. This covers both utility programs and a library
that adds POSIX system calls to Windows. Among them is pseudo tty
support for Windows that emulates the POSIX pty standard. The
latest Cygwin is always available from @uref{http://www.cygwin.com/,this location}. This
works well enough to run @emph{"make check"} of
the GNU development tree on Windows after a native build. But the
nature of ptys on Windows is still evolving. Your mileage may
vary.

@node Design Goals, A POSIX Conforming Test Framework, Release Notes, Overview
@section Design Goals

DejaGnu grew out of the internal needs of Cygnus Solutions,
the company formerly known as Cygnus Support. Cygnus maintained
and enhanced a variety of free programs in many different
environments and we needed a testing tool that:

@itemize 

@item
was useful to developers while fixing
bugs;

@item
automated running many tests during a software
release process;

@item
was portable among a variety of host
computers;

@item
supported cross-development
testing;

@item
permitted testing interactive programs, like
@code{GDB}; and 

@item
permitted testing batch oriented programs, like
@code{GCC}.
@end itemize

Some of the requirements proved challenging.  For example,
interactive programs do not lend themselves very well to automated testing.
But all the requirements are important: for instance, it is imperative to
make sure that @code{GDB} works as well when cross-debugging
as it does in a native configuration. 

Probably the greatest challenge was testing in a
cross-development environment.  Most cross-development
environments are customized by each developer.  Even when buying
packaged boards from vendors there are many differences.  The
communication interfaces vary from a serial line to Ethernet.
DejaGnu was designed with a modular communication setup, so that
each kind of communication can be added as required and supported
thereafter.  Once a communication procedure is coded, any test can
use it.  Currently DejaGnu can use @code{rsh},
@code{rlogin}, @code{telnet},
@code{tip}, @code{kermit} and
@code{mondfe} for remote communications.

@node A POSIX Conforming Test Framework, , Design Goals, Overview
@section A POSIX conforming test framework

DejaGnu conforms to the POSIX 1003.3 standard for test
frameworks. Rob Savoye was a member of that committee.

The POSIX standard 1003.3 defines what a testing framework needs to
provide, in order to permit the creation of POSIX conformance test
suites. This standard is primarily oriented to running POSIX conformance
tests, but its requirements also support testing of features not related
to POSIX conformance.  POSIX 1003.3 does not specify a particular testing
framework, but at this time there is only one other POSIX conforming test
framework: TET. TET was created by Unisoft for a consortium comprised of
X/Open, Unix International and the Open Software Foundation.

The POSIX documentation refers to @dfn{assertions}.
An assertion is a description of behavior.  For example, if a standard
says ``The sun shall shine'', a corresponding assertion might be ``The
sun is shining.''  A test based on this assertion would pass or fail
depending on whether it is day or night.  It is important to note
that the standard being tested is never 1003.3; the standard being tested
is some other standard, for which the assertions were written.

As there is no testsuite to test testing frameworks for POSIX
1003.3 conformance, verifying conformance to this standard is done by
repeatedly reading the standard and experimenting.  One of the main
things 1003.3 does specify is the set of allowed output messages and
their definitions.  Four messages are supported for a required feature of
POSIX conforming systems and a fifth for a conditional feature. DejaGnu
supports the use of all five output messages.  In this sense a testsuite
that uses exactly these messages can be considered POSIX conforming.
These definitions specify the output of a test
case:

@table @asis

@item PASS
A test has succeeded.  That is, it demonstrated that
the assertion is true.

@item XFAIL
POSIX 1003.3 does not incorporate the notion of
expected failures, so @emph{PASS}, instead of
@emph{XPASS}, must also be returned for test cases
which were expected to fail and did not.  This means that
@emph{PASS} is in some sense more ambiguous than if
@emph{XPASS} is also used.

@item FAIL
A test has produced the bug it was intended to
capture.  That is, it has demonstrated that the assertion is false.
The @emph{FAIL} message is based on the test case only.
Other messages are used to indicate a failure of the framework. As
with @emph{PASS}, POSIX tests must return
@emph{FAIL} rather than @emph{XFAIL} even
if a failure was expected.

@item UNRESOLVED
A test produced indeterminate results.  Usually, this
means the test executed in an unexpected fashion; this outcome
requires that a human being go over results, to determine if the test
should have passed or failed.  This message is also used for any test
that requires human intervention because it is beyond the abilities
of the testing framework.  Any unresolved test should resolved to
@emph{PASS} or @emph{FAIL} before a test
run can be considered finished.

Note that for POSIX, each assertion must produce a test result
code.  If the test isn't actually run, it must produce
@emph{UNRESOLVED} rather than just leaving that test
out of the output.  This means that you have to be careful when
writing tests to not carelessly use Tcl commands like
@emph{return}---if you alter the flow of control of the
Tcl code you must insure that every test still produces some result
code.

Here are some of the ways a test may wind up
@emph{UNRESOLVED}:
@end table

@itemize 

@item
A test's execution is
interrupted.

@item
A test does not produce a clear
result. This is usually because there was an
@emph{ERROR} from DejaGnu while processing
the test, or because there were three or more
@emph{WARNING} messages. Any
@emph{WARNING} or @emph{ERROR}
messages can invalidate the output of the test.  This
usually requires a human being to examine the output to
determine what really happened---and to improve the test
case.

@item
A test depends on a previous test, which
fails.

@item
The test was set up
incorrectly.
@end itemize

@table @asis

@item UNTESTED
A test was not run.  This is a place-holder, used
when there is no real test case yet.
@end table

The only remaining output message left is intended to test
features that are specified by the applicable POSIX standard as
conditional:

@table @asis

@item UNSUPPORTED
There is no support for the tested case.  This may
mean that a conditional feature of an operating system, or of a
compiler, is not implemented.  DejaGnu also uses this message when
a testing environment (often a ``bare board'' target) lacks basic
support for compiling or running the test case.  For example, a
test for the system subroutine @emph{gethostname}
would never work on a target board running only a boot
monitor.
@end table

DejaGnu uses the same output procedures to produce these messages
for all testsuites and these procedures are already known to conform
to POSIX 1003.3.  For a DejaGnu testsuite to conform to POSIX 1003.3,
you must avoid the @emph{setup}xfail@} procedure as
described in the @emph{PASS} section above and you must
be careful to return @emph{UNRESOLVED} where appropriate,
as described in the @emph{UNRESOLVED} section
above.

@node Getting DejaGnu up and running, Running Tests, Overview, Top
@chapter Getting DejaGnu up and running

This chapter was originally written by Niklaus Giger
(ngiger@@mus.ch) because he lost a week to figure out how DejaGnu works
and how to write a first test.

Follow these instructions as closely a possible in order get a
good insight into how DejaGnu works, else you might run into a lot of
subtle problems. You have been warned.

It should be no big problems installing DejaGnu using your
package manager or from the source code. Under a Debian/GNU/Linux
systems just type (as root) 

@example
apt-get install
dejagnu
@end example

@noindent
. These examples were run on a primary machine
with a AMD K6 and a Mac Powerbook G3 serving as a remote
target.

The tests for Windows were run under Windows using the actual
Cygwin version (1.3.x as of October 2001). Its target system was a PPC
embedded system running vxWorks.  

@menu
* Test your installation::
* Create a minimal project, e.g. calc: Create a minimal project; e_g_ calc.
* Our first automated tests::
* A first remote test::
@end menu

@node Test your installation, Create a minimal project; e_g_ calc, , Getting DejaGnu up and running
@section Test your installation

Create a new user called "dgt" (DejaGnuTest), which uses bash as
it login shell. PS1 must be set to '\u:\w\$ ' in its ~/.bashrc. Login
as this user, create an empty directory and change the working
directory to it. e.g

@example

dgt:~$ mkdir ~/dejagnu.test
dgt:~$ cd ~/dejagnu.test
@end example

Now you are ready to test DejaGnu's main program called
runtest. The expected output is shown

@strong{Runtest output in a empty directory
}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ runtest
WARNING: Couldn't find the global config file.
WARNING: No tool specified Test
Run By dgt on Sun Nov 25 17:07:03 2001 Native configuration is i586-pc-linux-gnu
=== tests ===
Schedule of variations: unix
Running target unix Using /usr/share/dejagnu/baseboards/unix.exp as board description file for target.
Using /usr/share/dejagnu/config/unix.exp as generic interface file for target.
ERROR: Couldn't find tool config file for unix.
=== Summary ===
@end example

We will show you later how to get rid of all the WARNING- and
ERROR-messages. The files testrun.sum and testrun.log have been
created, which do not interest us at this point. Let's remove
them.

@example
:~/dejagnu.test$ rm testrun.sum testrun.log
@end example

@menu
* Windows::
* Getting the source code for the calc example::
@end menu

@node Windows, Getting the source code for the calc example, , Test your installation
@subsection Windows

On Windows systems DejaGnu is part of a port of a lot of Unix
tools to the Windows OS, called Cygwin. Cygwin may be downloaded and
installed from a mirror of http://www.cygwin.com/. All examples were
also run on Windows. If nothing is said, you can assume that you
should get the same output as on a Unix system.

You will need a telnet daemon if you want to use a Windows box
as a remote target. There seems to be a freeware telnet daemon at
http://www.fictional.net/.

@node Getting the source code for the calc example, , Windows, Test your installation
@subsection Getting the source code for the calc example

If you are running a Debian distribution you can find the
examples under /usr/share/doc/dejagnu/examples. These examples seem to
be missing in Red Hat's RPM. In this case download the sources of
DejaGnu and adjust the paths to the DejaGnu examples
accordingly.

@node Create a minimal project; e_g_ calc, Our first automated tests, Test your installation, Getting DejaGnu up and running
@section Create a minimal project, e.g. calc

In this section you will to start a small project,
using the sample application calc, which is part of your DejaGnu
distribution

@menu
* A simple project without the GNU autotools::
* Using autoconf/autoheader/automake::
@end menu

@node A simple project without the GNU autotools, Using autoconf/autoheader/automake, , Create a minimal project; e_g_ calc
@subsection A simple project without the GNU autotools

The runtest program can be run standalone. All the
autoconf/automake support is just cause those programs are commonly
used for other GNU applications. The key to running runtest standalone
is having the local site.exp file setup correctly, which automake
does.

The generated site.exp should like like:

@example

set tool calc
set srcdir .
set objdir /home/dgt/dejagnu.test
@end example

@node Using autoconf/autoheader/automake, , A simple project without the GNU autotools, Create a minimal project; e_g_ calc
@subsection Using autoconf/autoheader/automake

We have to prepare some input file in order to run autoconf and
automake. There is book "GNU autoconf, automake and
libtool" by Garry V. Vaughan, et al. NewRider, ISBN
1-57870-190-2 which describes this process thoroughly.

From the calc example distributed with the DejaGnu documentation
you should copy the program file itself (calc.c) and some additional
files, which you might examine a little bit close to derive their
meanings.

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ cp -r /usr/share/doc/dejagnu/examples/calc/\
@{configure.in,Makefile.am,calc.c,testsuite@} .
@end example

In Makemake.am note the presence of the AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS = dejagnu. This option is needed.

Run aclocal to generate aclocal.m4, which is a collection of
macros needed by configure.in

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ aclocal
@end example

autoconf is another part of the auto-tools. Run it to generate
configure based on information contained in configure.in.

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ autoconf
@end example

autoheader is another part of the auto-tools.
Run it to generate calc.h.in. 

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ autoheader
@end example

The Makefile.am of this example was developed as port of the DejaGnu
distribution.
Adapt Makefile.am for this test. Replace the line
"#noinst_PROGRAMS = calc" to
"bin_PROGRAMS = calc".
Change the RUNTESTDEFAULTFLAGS from
"$$srcdir/testsuite" to
"./testsuite".

Running automake at this point contains a series of warning in
its output as shown in the following example:

@strong{Sample output of automake with missing files}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ automake --add-missing
automake: configure.in: installing `./install-sh'
automake: configure.in: installing `./mkinstalldirs'
automake: configure.in: installing `./missing'
automake: Makefile.am: installing `./INSTALL'
automake: Makefile.am: required file `./NEWS' not found
automake: Makefile.am: required file `./README' not found
automake: Makefile.am: installing `./COPYING'
automake: Makefile.am: required file `./AUTHORS' not found
automake: Makefile.am: required file `./ChangeLog' not found
configure.in: 4: required file `./calc.h.in' not found
Makefile.am:6: required directory ./doc does not exist
@end example

Create a empty directory doc and empty files
INSTALL, NEWS, README, AUTHORS, ChangeLog and COPYING.
The default COPYING will point to the GNU Public License (GPL).
In a real project it would be time to add some meaningful text in each file.

Adapt calc to your environment by calling configure.

@strong{Sample output of configure
}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ ./configure
creating cache ./config.cache
checking whether to enable maintainer-specific portions of Makefiles... no
checking for a BSD compatible install... /usr/bin/install -c
checking whether build environment is sane... yes
checking whether make sets $@{MAKE@}... yes
checking for working aclocal... found
checking for working autoconf... found
checking for working automake... found
checking for working autoheader... found
checking for working makeinfo... found
checking for gcc... gcc checking whether the C compiler (gcc ) works... yes
checking whether the C compiler (gcc ) is a cross-compiler... no
checking whether we are using GNU C... yes
checking whether gcc accepts -g... yes
checking for a BSD compatible install... /usr/bin/install -c
checking how to run the C preprocessor... gcc -E
checking for stdlib.h... yes
checking for strcmp... yes
updating cache ./config.cache
creating ./config.status
creating Makefile creating calc.h
@end example

If you are familiar with GNU software,
this output should not contain any surprise to you.
Any errors should be easy to fix for such a simple program.

Build the calc executable:

@strong{Sample output building calc
}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ make
gcc -DHAVE_CONFIG_H -I. -I. -I. -g -O2 -c calc.c
gcc -g -O2 -o calc calc.o
@end example

You prepared a few files and then called some
commands. Respecting the right order assures a automatic and correctly
compiled calc program. The following example resumes the correct
order.

@strong{Creating the calc program using the GNU autotools}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ aclocal
dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ autoconf
dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ autoheader
dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ automake --add-missing
dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ ./configure
dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ make

@end example

Play with calc and verify whether it works correctly.
A sample session might look like this:

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ ./calc
calc: version
Version: 1.1
calc: add 3 4
7
calc: multiply 3 4 
12
calc: multiply 2 4 
12
calc: quit

@end example

Look at the intentional bug that 2 times 4 equals 12.

The tests run by DejaGnu need a file called site.exp,
which is automatically generated if we call "make
site.exp". This was the purpose of the "AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS =
dejagnu" in Makefile.am.

@strong{Sample output generating a site.exp}

@example

dgt: make site.exp
dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ make site.exp
Making a new site.exp file...
@end example

@node Our first automated tests, A first remote test, Create a minimal project; e_g_ calc, Getting DejaGnu up and running
@section Our first automated tests

@menu
* Running the test for the calc example::
* The various config files or how to avoid warnings::
* When trouble strikes::
* Testing "Hello world" locally::
@end menu

@node Running the test for the calc example, The various config files or how to avoid warnings, , Our first automated tests
@subsection Running the test for the calc example

Now we are ready to call the automated tests 

@strong{Sample output of runtest in a configured directory}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ make check
make check-DEJAGNU
make[1]: Entering directory `/home/dgt/dejagnu.test' srcdir=`cd . && pwd`; export srcdir; \
EXPECT=expect; export EXPECT; \ runtest=runtest; \
if /bin/sh -c "$runtest --version" > /dev/null 2>&1; then \
$runtest --tool calc CALC=`pwd`/calc --srcdir ./testsuite ; \
else echo "WARNING: could not find \`runtest'" 1>&2; :;\
fi
WARNING: Couldn't find the global config file.
WARNING: Couldn't find tool init file
Test Run By dgt on Sun Nov 25 21:42:21 2001
Native configuration is i586-pc-linux-gnu

       === calc tests ===

Schedule of variations:
   unix

Running target unix
Using /usr/share/dejagnu/baseboards/unix.exp as board description file for target.
Using /usr/share/dejagnu/config/unix.exp as generic interface file for target.
Using ./testsuite/config/unix.exp as tool-and-target-specific interface file.
Running ./testsuite/calc.test/calc.exp ...
FAIL: multiply2 (bad match)

=== calc Summary ===

# of expected passes 5
# of unexpected failures 1
/home/Dgt/dejagnu.test/calc version Version: 1.1
make[1]: *** [check-DEJAGNU] Fehler 1
make[1]: Leaving directory `/home/Dgt/dejagnu.test' make: *** [check-am] Fehler 2
@end example

Did you see the  line "FAIL:"? The test cases for calc catch the bug in the calc.c file. Fix the error in calc.c later as the following examples assume a unchanged calc.c.

Examine the output files calc.sum and calc.log. Try to
understand the testcases written in
~/dejagnu.test/testsuite/calc.test/calc.exp. To understand Expect you
might take a look at the book "Exploring Expect", which is
an excellent resource for learning and using Expect. (Pub: O'Reilly,
ISBN 1-56592-090-2) The book contains hundreds of examples and also
includes a tutorial on Tcl. Exploring Expect is 602 pages
long.

@node The various config files or how to avoid warnings, When trouble strikes, Running the test for the calc example, Our first automated tests
@subsection The various config files or how to avoid warnings

DejaGnu may be customized by each user. It first searches for a
file called ~/.dejagnurc. Create the file ~/.dejagnurc and insert the
following line:

@example

puts "I am ~/.dejagnurc"
@end example

Rerun make check. Test whether the output contains "I am ~/.dejagnurc".
Create ~/my_dejagnu.exp and insert the following line:

@example

puts "I am ~/my_dejagnu.exp"
@end example

In a Bash-Shell enter

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ export DEJAGNU=~/my_dejagnu.exp
@end example

Run "make check" again. The output should not contain
"WARNING: Couldn't find the global config file.".
Create the sub-directory lib. Create the file "calc.exp" in it and insert the following line:

@example

puts "I am lib/calc.exp"
@end example

The last warning "WARNING: Couldn't find tool init file"
should not be part of the output of make check.
Create the directory ~/boards. Create the file ~/boards/standard.exp and insert the following line:

@example

puts "I am boards/standard.exp"
@end example

If the variable DEJAGNU is still not empty then the (abbreviated) output of "make check" should look like this:

@strong{Sample output of runtest with the usual configuration files}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ make check
<...>
fi
I am ~/.dejagnurc
I am ~/my_dejagnu.exp
I am lib/calc.exp
Test Run By dgt on Sun Nov 25 22:19:14 2001
Native configuration is i586-pc-linux-gnu

     === calc tests ===
Using /home/Dgt/boards/standard.exp as standard board description\
file for build.
I am ~/boards/standard.exp
Using /home/Dgt/boards/standard.exp as standard board description\
 file for host.
I am ~/boards/standard.exp

Schedule of variations:
  unix

Running target unix
Using /home/Dgt/boards/standard.exp as standard board description\
 file for target.
I am ~/boards/standard.exp
Using /usr/share/dejagnu/baseboards/unix.exp as board description file\
for target.
<...>
@end example

It is up to you to decide when and where to use any of the above
mentioned config files for customizing.
This chapters showed you where and in which order the different config
files are run.

@node When trouble strikes, Testing "Hello world" locally, The various config files or how to avoid warnings, Our first automated tests
@subsection When trouble strikes

Calling runtest with the '-v'-flag shows you in even more details which files are searched in which order. Passing it several times gives more and more details. 

@strong{Displaying details about runtest execution}

@example

runtest -v -v -v --tool calc CALC=`pwd`/calc --srcdir ./testsuite
@end example

Calling runtest with the '--debug'-flag logs a lot of details to dbg.log where you can analyse it afterwards. 

In all test cases you can temporary adjust the verbosity of information by adding the following Tcl-command to any tcl file that gets loaded by
dejagnu, for instance, ~/.dejagnurc:

@example

set verbose 9
@end example

@node Testing "Hello world" locally, , When trouble strikes, Our first automated tests
@subsection Testing "Hello world" locally

This test checks, whether the built-in shell command "echo Hello world"
will really write "Hello world" on the console.
Create the file ~/dejagnu.test/testsuite/calc.test/local_echo.exp.
It should contain the following lines

@strong{A first (local) test case}

@example

set test "Local Hello World"
send "echo Hello World"
expect @{
   -re "Hello World"  @{ pass "$test" @}
@}
@end example

Run runtest again and verify the output "calc.log"

@node A first remote test, , Our first automated tests, Getting DejaGnu up and running
@section A first remote test

Testing remote targets is a lot trickier especially if you are using an
embedded target
which has no built in support for things like a compiler, ftp server or a Bash-shell.
Before you can test calc on a remote target you have to acquire a few basics skills.

@menu
* Setup telnet to your own host::
* A test case for login via telnet::
* Remote testing "Hello world"::
* Transferring files from/to the target::
* Preparing for crosscompilation::
* Remote testing of calc::
* Using Windows as host and vxWorks as target::
@end menu

@node Setup telnet to your own host, A test case for login via telnet, , A first remote test
@subsection Setup telnet to your own host

The easiest remote host is usually the host you are working on.
In this example we will use telnet to login in your own workstation.
For security reasons you should never have a telnet daemon running on
machine connected on the internet, as password and usernames are transmitted
in clear text.
We assume you know how to setup your machine for a telnet daemon.

Next try whether you may login in your own host by issuing the
command "telnet localhost.1". In order to be able to
distinguish between a normal session and a telnet login add the following lines to /home/dgt/.bashrc.

@example

if [ "$REMOTEHOST" ]
then
   PS1='remote:\w\$ '
fi
@end example

Now on the machine a "remote" login looks like this:

@strong{Sample log of a telnet login to localhost}

@example

dgt:~/dejagnu.test$ telnet localhost
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to 127.0.0.1.
Escape character is '^]'.
Debian GNU/Linux testing/unstable Linux
K6Linux login: dgt
Password:
Last login: Sun Nov 25 22:46:34 2001 from localhost on pts/4
Linux K6Linux 2.4.14 #1 Fre Nov 16 19:28:25 CET 2001 i586 unknown
No mail.
remote:~$ exit
logout
Connection closed by foreign host.
@end example

@node A test case for login via telnet, Remote testing "Hello world", Setup telnet to your own host, A first remote test
@subsection A test case for login via telnet

In order to define a correct setup we have add a line containing
"set target unix" either to ~/.dejagnurc or to ~/my_dejagnu.exp.
In ~/boards/standard.exp add the following four lines to define a few patterns for the DejaGnu telnet login procedure.

@strong{Defining a remote target board}

@example

set_board_info shell_prompt    "remote:"
set_board_info telnet_username "dgt"
set_board_info telnet_password "top_secret"
set_board_info hostname        "localhost"

@end example

As DejaGnu will be parsing the telnet session output for some well
known pattern the output there are a lot of things that can go wrong.
If you have any problems verify your setup:

@itemize 

@item
Is @file{/etc/motd} empty?

@item
Is @file{/etc/issue.net} empty?

@item
Exists a empty @file{~/.hushlogin}?

@item
The LANG environment variable must be either empty or set to "C". 
@end itemize

To test the login via telnet write a sample test case.
Create the file ~/dejagnu.test/testsuite/calc.test/remote_echo.exp and
add the following few lines:

@strong{DejaGnu script for logging in into a remote target}

@example

puts "this is remote_echo.exp target for $target "
target_info $target
#set verbose 9
set shell_id [remote_open $target]
set test "Remote login to $target"
#set verbose 0
puts "Spawn id for remote shell is $shell_id"
if @{ $shell_id > 0 @} @{
   pass "$test"
@} else @{
   fail "Remote open to $target"
@}
@end example

In the runtest output you should find something like:

@example

Running ./testsuite/calc.test/local_echo.exp ...
Running ./testsuite/calc.test/remote_echo.exp ...
this is remote_echo.exp target is unix
Spawn id for remote shell is exp7
@end example

Have again a look at calc.log to get a feeling how DejaGnu and expect
parse the input. 

@node Remote testing "Hello world", Transferring files from/to the target, A test case for login via telnet, A first remote test
@subsection Remote testing "Hello world"

Next you will transform the above "hello world" example to
its remote equivalent.
This can be done by adding the following lines to our file remote_echo.exp.

@strong{A first (local) remote "Hello world" test}

@example

set test "Remote_send Hello World"
set status [remote_send $target "echo \"Hello\" \"World\"\n" ]
pass "$test"
set test "Remote_expect Hello World"
remote_expect $target 5 @{
   -re "Hello World"  @{ pass "$test" @}
@}
@end example

Call make check. The output should contain
"# of expected passes 9" and "# of unexpected failures 1".

Have a look at the procedures in /usr/share/dejagnu/remote.exp to have an overview of the offered procedures and their features. 

Now setup a real target.
In the following example we assume as target a PowerBook running Debian.
As above add a test user "dgt", install telnet and FTP servers.
In order to distinguish it from the host add the line

@example
PS1='test:>'
@end example

@noindent
to /home/dgt/.bash_profile.
Also add a corresponding entry "powerbook" to /etc/hosts and verify that you
are able to ping, telnet and ftp to the target "powerbook".

In order to let runtest run its test on the "powerbook" target change the following lines in ~/boards/standard.exp:

@strong{Board definition for a remote target}

@example

set_board_info protocol        "telnet"
set_board_info telnet_username "dgt"
set_board_info telnet_password "top_secret"
set_board_info shell_prompt    "test:> "
set_board_info hostname        "powerbook"
@end example

Now call runtest again with the same arguments and verify whether all went okay by taking a close look at calc.log.

@node Transferring files from/to the target, Preparing for crosscompilation, Remote testing "Hello world", A first remote test
@subsection Transferring files from/to the target

A simple procedure like this will do the job for you:

@strong{Test script to transfer a file to a remote target}

@example

set test "Remote_download"
puts "Running Remote_download"
# set verbose 9
set remfile /home/dgt/dejagnu2

set status [remote_download $target /home/dgt/.dejagnurc $remfile]
if @{ "$status" == "" @} @{
     fail "Remote download to $remfile on $target"
@} else @{
   pass "$test"
@}

puts "status of remote_download ist $status"
# set verbose 0
@end example

After running runtest again, check whether the file dejagnu2 exists on the target.
This example will only work if the rcp command works with your target.
If you have a working FTP-server on the target you can use it by adding the
following lines to ~/boards/standard.exp:

@strong{Defining a board to use FTP as file transport}

@example

set_board_info file_transfer   "ftp"
set_board_info ftp_username    "dgt"
set_board_info ftp_password    "1234"
@end example

@node Preparing for crosscompilation, Remote testing of calc, Transferring files from/to the target, A first remote test
@subsection Preparing for crosscompilation

For crosscompiling you need working binutils, gcc and a base library like
libc or glib for your target.
It is beyond the scope of this document to describe how to get it working.
The following examples assume a cross compiler for PowerPC which is called linux-powerpc-gcc.

Add AC_CANONICAL_TARGET in dejagnu.test/configure.in at the following location. Copy config.guess from /usr/share/automake to dejagnu.test.

@example

AM_CONFIG_HEADER(calc.h)
AC_CANONICAL_TARGET([])
AM_INIT_AUTOMAKE(calc, 1.1)
@end example

You need to run automake 2.5 or later.
Depending on your installation calling autoconf2.5 instead of autoconf is not needed.
The sequence to regenerate all files is:

@strong{Using autotools for cross development}

@example

$ autoconf2.5
$ autoheader
$ automake
$ ./configure --host=powerpc-linux --target=powerpc-linux
configure: WARNING: If you wanted to set the --build type, don't use --host.
    If a cross compiler is detected then cross compile mode will be used.
checking build system type... ./config.guess: ./config.guess: No such file or directory
configure: error: cannot guess build type; you must specify one
$ cp /usr/share/automake/config.guess .
$ ./configure --host=powerpc-linux --target=powerpc-linux
configure: WARNING: If you wanted to set the --build type, don't use --host.
If a cross compiler is detected then cross compile mode will be used. \
checking build system type... i586-pc-linux-gnu
checking host system type... powerpc-unknown-linux-gnu
<...>
checking whether we are cross compiling... yes
<...>
Configuration:
Source code location: .
C Compiler: powerpc-linux-gcc
C Compiler flags: -g -O2

@end example

Everything should be ready to recompile for the target:

@example
$ make
powerpc-linux-gcc -DHAVE_CONFIG_H -I. -I. -I. -g -O2 -c calc.c
powerpc-linux-gcc -g -O2 -o calc calc.o

@end example

@node Remote testing of calc, Using Windows as host and vxWorks as target, Preparing for crosscompilation, A first remote test
@subsection Remote testing of calc

Not yet written, as I have problem getting libc6-dev-powerpc to work. Probably I first have to build my cross compiler. 

@node Using Windows as host and vxWorks as target, , Remote testing of calc, A first remote test
@subsection Using Windows as host and vxWorks as target

A more thorough walk-through will be written in a few weeks.

In order to test the vxWorks as a target I changed boards/standards.exp to reflect my settings (IP, username, password). Then I reconfigured vxWorks to include a FTP and telnet server (using the same username/password combination ad in boards/standard.exp).

With this setup and some minor modification (e.g. replacing echo by printf) in my test cases I could test my vxWorks system. It sure does not seem to be a correct setup by DejaGnu standard. For instance, it still loading /usr/share/dejagnu/baseboards/unix.exp instead of vxWorks. In any case I found that (at least under Windows) I did not find out how the command line would let me override settings in my personal config files.

@node Running Tests, Customizing DejaGnu, Getting DejaGnu up and running, Top
@chapter Running Tests

There are two ways to execute a testsuite. The most
common way is when there is existing support in the
@file{Makefile}. This support consists of a
@emph{check} target. The other way is to execute the
@code{runtest} program directly. To run
@code{runtest} directly from the command line requires
either all the correct options, or the @ref{Local Config File} must be setup
correctly.

@menu
* Make check: Make Check.
* Runtest::
* The files DejaGnu produces.: Output Files.
@end menu

@node Make Check, Runtest, , Running Tests
@section Make check

To run tests from an existing collection, first use
@code{configure} as usual to set up the
build directory. Then try typing:

@example

      make check
      
@end example

If the @emph{check} target exists, it
usually saves you some trouble. For instance, it can set up any
auxiliary programs or other files needed by the tests. The most
common file the check builds is the
@emph{site.exp}. The site.exp file contains
various variables that DejaGnu used to determine the
configuration of the program being tested. This is mostly for
supporting remote testing.

The @emph{check} target is supported by GNU
Automake. To have DejaGnu support added to your
generated @file{Makefile.in}, just add the keyword
dejagnu to the AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS variable in your
@file{Makefile.am} file.

Once you have run @emph{make check} to build
any auxiliary files, you can invoke the test driver
@code{runtest} directly to repeat the tests.
You will also have to execute @code{runtest}
directly for test collections with no
@emph{check} target in the
@file{Makefile}.

@node Runtest, Output Files, Make Check, Running Tests
@section Runtest

@code{runtest} is the executable test driver
for DejaGnu. You can specify two kinds of things on the
@code{runtest} command line: command line options,
and Tcl variables for the test scripts. The options are listed
alphabetically below.

@code{runtest} returns an exit code of
@emph{1} if any test has an unexpected result; otherwise
(if all tests pass or fail as expected) it returns @emph{0}
as the exit code.

@menu
* Output States::
* Invoking Runtest::
* Common Options: Common Operations.
@end menu

@node Output States, Invoking Runtest, , Runtest
@subsection Output States

@file{runtest} flags the outcome of each
test as one of these cases. @ref{A POSIX Conforming Test Framework} for a
discussion of how POSIX specifies the meanings of these
cases.

@table @asis

@item PASS
The most desirable outcome: the test succeeded, and
was expected to succeed.

@item XPASS
A pleasant kind of failure: a test was expected to
fail, but succeeded. This may indicate progress; inspect the test
case to determine whether you should amend it to stop expecting
failure.

@item FAIL
A test failed, although it was expected to succeed.
This may indicate regress; inspect the test case and the failing
software to locate the bug.

@item XFAIL
A test failed, but it was expected to fail.  This
result indicates no change in a known bug.  If a test fails because
the operating system where the test runs lacks some facility required
by the test, the outcome is @emph{UNSUPPORTED}
instead.

@item UNRESOLVED
Output from a test requires manual inspection; the
testsuite could not automatically determine the outcome.  For
example, your tests can report this outcome is when a test does not
complete as expected.

@item UNTESTED
A test case is not yet complete, and in particular
cannot yet produce a @emph{PASS} or
@emph{FAIL}. You can also use this outcome in dummy
``tests'' that note explicitly the absence of a real test case for a
particular property.

@item UNSUPPORTED
A test depends on a conditionally available feature
that does not exist (in the configured testing environment).  For
example, you can use this outcome to report on a test case that does
not work on a particular target because its operating system support
does not include a required subroutine.
@end table

runtest may also display the following messages:

@table @asis

@item ERROR
Indicates a major problem (detected by the test case
itself) in running the test. This is usually an unrecoverable error,
such as a missing file or loss of communication to the target. (POSIX
testsuites should not emit this message; use
@emph{UNSUPPORTED}, @emph{UNTESTED}, or
@emph{UNRESOLVED} instead, as
appropriate.)

@item WARNING
Indicates a possible problem in running the
test. Usually warnings correspond to recoverable errors, or display
an important message about the following tests.

@item NOTE
An informational message about the test
case.
@end table

@node Invoking Runtest, Common Operations, Output States, Runtest
@subsection Invoking Runtest

This is the full set of command line options that
@file{runtest} recognizes. Arguments may be
abbreviated to the shortest unique string.

@table @asis

@item @code{--all} (-a)
Display all test output. By default,
@emph{runtest} shows only the output of tests that
produce unexpected results; that is, tests with status
@emph{FAIL} (unexpected failure),
@emph{XPASS} (unexpected success), or
@emph{ERROR} (a severe error in the test case
itself). Specify @code{--all} to see output for tests
with status @emph{PASS} (success, as expected)
@emph{XFAIL} (failure, as expected), or
@emph{WARNING} (minor error in the test case
itself).

@item @code{--build [string]}
@emph{string} is a full configuration
``triple'' name as used by @code{configure}. This
is the type of machine DejaGnu and the tools to be tested are built
on. For a normal cross this is the same as the host, but for a
canadian cross, they are separate.

@item @code{--host [string]}
@code{string} is a full configuration
``triple'' name as used by @emph{configure}.  Use this
option to override the default string recorded by your
configuration's choice of host.  This choice does not change how
anything is actually configured unless --build is also specified; it
affects @emph{only} DejaGnu procedures that compare the
host string with particular values.  The procedures
@emph{ishost}, @emph{istarget},
@emph{isnative}, and @emph{setup}xfail@}
are affected by @code{--host}. In this usage,
@emph{host} refers to the machine that the tests are to
be run on, which may not be the same as the
@emph{build} machine. If @code{--build}
is also specified, then @code{--host} refers to the
machine that the tests wil, be run on, not the machine DejaGnu is run
on.

@item @code{--host_board [name]}
The host board to use.

@item @code{--target [string]}
Use this option to override the default setting
(running native tests). @emph{string} is a full
configuration ``triple'' name of the form
@emph{cpu-vendor-os} as used by
@code{configure}. This option changes the
configuration @emph{runtest} uses for the default tool
names, and other setup information.

@item @code{--debug} (-de)
Turns on the @emph{expect} internal
debugging output. Debugging output is displayed as part of the
@emph{runtest} output, and logged to a file called
@file{dbg.log}. The extra debugging output does
@emph{not} appear on standard output, unless the
verbose level is greater than 2 (for instance, to see debug output
immediately, specify @code{--debug}-v -v@}). The
debugging output shows all attempts at matching the test output of
the tool with the scripted patterns describing expected output.  The
output generated with @code{--strace} also goes into
@file{dbg.log}.

@item @code{--help} (-he)
Prints out a short summary of the
@emph{runtest} options, then exits (even if you also
specify other options).

@item @code{--ignore [name(s)] }
The names of specific tests to
ignore.

@item @code{--objdir [path]}
Use @emph{path} as the top directory
containing any auxiliary compiled test code. This defaults to
@file{.}.  Use this option to locate pre-compiled test
code.  You can normally prepare any auxiliary files needed with
@emph{make}.

@item @code{--outdir [path]}
Write output logs in directory
@file{path}.  The default is @emph{.@},
the} directory where you start
@emph{runtest}. This option affects only the summary
and the detailed log files
@file{tool.sum} and
@file{tool.log}. The DejaGnu debug
log @file{dbg.log} always appears (when requested) in
the local directory.

@item @code{--reboot [name]}
Reboot the target board when
@emph{runtest} initializes. Usually, when running tests
on a separate target board, it is safer to reboot the target to be
certain of its state.  However, when developing test scripts,
rebooting takes a lot of time.

@item @code{--srcdir [path]}
Use @file{path} as the top directory
for test scripts to run. @emph{runtest} looks in this
directory for any subdirectory whose name begins with the toolname
(specified with @code{--tool}). For instance, with
@code{--tool}gdb@}, @emph{runtest} uses
tests in subdirectories @file{gdb.*} (with the usual
shell-like filename expansion).  If you do not use
@code{--srcdir}, @emph{runtest} looks for
test directories under the current working
directory.

@item @code{--strace [number]}
Turn on internal tracing for
@emph{expect}, to n levels deep. By adjusting the
level, you can control the extent to which your output expands
multi-level Tcl statements.  This allows you to ignore some levels of
@emph{case} or @emph{if} statements.
Each procedure call or control structure counts as one ``level''. The
output is recorded in the same file, @file{dbg.log},
used for output from @code{--debug}.

@item @code{--connect [program]}
Connect to a target testing environment as specified
by @emph{type}, if the target is not the computer
running @emph{runtest}.  For example, use
@code{--connect} to change the program used to connect
to a ``bare board'' boot monitor.  The choices for
@emph{type} in the DejaGnu 1.4 distribution are
@emph{rlogin}, @emph{telnet},
@emph{rsh}, @emph{tip},
@emph{kermit}, and @emph{mondfe}.

The default for this option depends on the configuration most
convenient communication method available, but often other
alternatives work as well; you may find it useful to try alternative
connect methods if you suspect a communication problem with your
testing target.

@item @code{--baud [number]}
Set the default baud rate to something other than
9600. (Some serial interface programs, like @emph{tip},
use a separate initialization file instead of this
value.)

@item @code{--target_board [name(s)]}
The list of target boards to run tests
on.

@anchor{--tool[name[s]]}@item @code{--tool[name(s)]}
Specifies which testsuite to run, and what
initialization module to use. @code{--tool} is used
@emph{only} for these two purposes. It is
@emph{not} used to name the executable program to
test. Executable tool names (and paths) are recorded in
@file{site.exp} and you can override them by specifying
Tcl variables on the command line.

For example, including "@code{--tool} gcc" on the
@emph{runtest} command line runs tests from all test
subdirectories whose names match @file{gcc.*}, and uses
one of the initialization modules named
@file{config/*-gcc.exp}. To specify the name of the
compiler (perhaps as an alternative path to what
@emph{runtest} would use by default), use
@emph{GCC=binname} on the @emph{runtest}
command line.

@item @code{--tool_exec [name]}
The path to the tool executable to
test.

@item @code{--tool_opts [options]}
A list of additional options to pass to the
tool.

@item @code{--verbose} (-v)
Turns on more output. Repeating this option increases
the amount of output displayed. Level one (@emph{-v})
is simply test output. Level two (@emph{-v}-v@}) shows
messages on options, configuration, and process control.  Verbose
messages appear in the detailed (@file{*.log}) log
file, but not in the summary (@file{*.sum}) log
file.

@item @code{--version} (-V)
Prints out the version numbers of DejaGnu,
@emph{expect} and Tcl, and exits without running any
tests.

@item @code{--D[0-1]}
Start the internal Tcl debugger. The Tcl debugger
supports breakpoints, single stepping, and other common debugging
activities. See the document "Debugger for Tcl Applications" by Don
Libes. (Distributed in PostScript form with
@emph{expect} as the file
@file{expect/tcl-debug.ps.}. If you specify
@emph{-D1}, the @emph{expect} shell stops
at a breakpoint as soon as DejaGnu invokes it. If you specify
@emph{-D0}, DejaGnu starts as usual, but you can enter
the debugger by sending an interrupt (e.g. by typing
@key{C}@key{c}).

@item @file{testfile}.exp[=arg(s)]
Specify the names of testsuites to run. By default,
@emph{runtest} runs all tests for the tool, but you can
restrict it to particular testsuites by giving the names of the
@emph{.exp expect} scripts that control
them. @emph{testsuite}.exp may not include path
information; use plain filenames.

@item @file{testfile}.exp="testfile1 ..."
Specify a subset of tests in a suite to run. For
compiler or assembler tests, which often use a single
@emph{.exp} script covering many different source
files, this option allows you to further restrict the tests by
listing particular source files to compile. Some tools even support
wildcards here.  The wildcards supported depend upon the tool, but
typically they are @emph{?}, @emph{*},
and @emph{[chars]}.

@item @code{tclvar}=value
You can define Tcl variables for use by your test
scripts in the same style used with @emph{make} for
environment variables.  For example, @emph{runtest
GDB=gdb.old} defines a variable called
@code{GDB}; when your scripts refer to
@code{$GDB} in this run, they use the value
@emph{gdb.old}.

The default Tcl variables used for most tools are defined in
the main DejaGnu @emph{Makefile}; their values are
captured in the @file{site.exp} file.
@end table

@node Common Operations, , Invoking Runtest, Runtest
@subsection Common Options

Typically, you don't need must to use any command-line options.
@code{--tool} used is only required when there are more than
one testsuite in the same directory. The default options are in the
local site.exp file, created by "make site.exp".

For example, if the directory @file{gdb/testsuite}
contains a collection of DejaGnu tests for GDB, you can run them like
this:

@example

	  eg$ cd gdb/testsuite
	  eg$ runtest --tool gdb
	
@end example

Test output follows, ending with:

@example

		=== gdb Summary ===

		# of expected passes 508
		# of expected failures 103
		/usr/latest/bin/gdb version 4.14.4 -nx
	
@end example

You can use the option @code{--srcdir} to point to
some other directory containing a collection of tests:

@example

	  eg$ runtest--srcdir /devo/gdb/testsuite
	
@end example

By default, @code{runtest} prints only the
names of the tests it runs, output from any tests that have unexpected
results, and a summary showing how many tests passed and how many
failed.  To display output from all tests (whether or not they behave
as expected), use the @code{--all} option.  For more
verbose output about processes being run, communication, and so on, use
@code{--verbose}. To see even more output, use multiple
@code{--verbose} options. for a more detailed explanation
of each @code{runtest} option.

Test output goes into two files in your current directory:
summary output in @file{tool.sum},
and detailed output in @file{
tool.log}. (@emph{tool}
refers to the collection of tests; for example, after a run with
@code{--tool} gdb, look for output files
@file{gdb.sum} and
@file{gdb.log}.)

@node Output Files, , Runtest, Running Tests
@section The files DejaGnu produces.

DejaGnu always writes two kinds of output files: summary
logs and detailed logs.  The contents of both of these are
determined by your tests.

For troubleshooting, a third kind of output file is useful:
use @code{--debug} to request an output file showing
details of what Expect is doing
internally.

@menu
* Summary File::
* Log File::
* Debug Log File::
@end menu

@node Summary File, Log File, , Output Files
@subsection Summary File

DejaGnu always produces a summary output file
@file{tool.sum}. This summary shows the names of
all test files run; for each test file, one line of output from
each @code{pass} command (showing status
@emph{PASS} or @emph{XPASS}) or
@code{fail} command (status
@emph{FAIL} or @emph{XFAIL});
trailing summary statistics that count passing and failing tests
(expected and unexpected); and the full pathname and version
number of the tool tested.  (All possible outcomes, and all
errors, are always reflected in the summary output file,
regardless of whether or not you specify
@code{--all}.)

If any of your tests use the procedures
@code{unresolved}, @code{unsupported},
or @code{runtested}, the summary output also
tabulates the corresponding outcomes.

For example, after @code{runtest --tool
binutils}, look for a summary log in
@file{binutils.sum}. Normally, DejaGnu writes this
file in your current working directory; use the
@code{--outdir} option to select a different
directory.

@strong{Here is a short sample summary log}

@example

	Test Run By rob on Mon May 25 21:40:57 PDT 1992
		 === gdb tests ===
	Running ./gdb.t00/echo.exp ...
	PASS:   Echo test
	Running ./gdb.all/help.exp ...
	PASS:   help add-symbol-file
	PASS:   help aliases
	PASS:   help breakpoint "bre" abbreviation
	FAIL:   help run "r" abbreviation
	Running ./gdb.t10/crossload.exp ...
	PASS:   m68k-elf (elf-big) explicit format; loaded
	XFAIL:  mips-ecoff (ecoff-bigmips) "ptype v_signed_char" signed C types
                === gdb Summary ===
	# of expected passes 5
	# of expected failures 1
	# of unexpected failures 1
	/usr/latest/bin/gdb version 4.6.5 -q
      
@end example

@node Log File, Debug Log File, Summary File, Output Files
@subsection Log File

DejaGnu also saves a detailed log file
@file{tool.log}, showing any output generated by
tests as well as the summary output. For example, after
@code{runtest --tool binutils}, look for a detailed
log in @file{binutils.log}. Normally, DejaGnu
writes this file in your current working directory; use the
@code{--outdir} option to select a different
directory.

@strong{Here is a brief example showing a detailed log for
G++ tests}

@example

	Test Run By rob on Mon May 25 21:40:43 PDT 1992

                === g++ tests ===

	--- Running ./g++.other/t01-1.exp ---
        PASS:   operate delete

	--- Running ./g++.other/t01-2.exp ---
        FAIL:   i960 bug EOF
	p0000646.C: In function `int  warn_return_1 ()':
	p0000646.C:109: warning: control reaches end of non-void function
	p0000646.C: In function `int  warn_return_arg (int)':
	p0000646.C:117: warning: control reaches end of non-void function
	p0000646.C: In function `int  warn_return_sum (int, int)':
	p0000646.C:125: warning: control reaches end of non-void function
	p0000646.C: In function `struct foo warn_return_foo ()':
	p0000646.C:132: warning: control reaches end of non-void function

	--- Running ./g++.other/t01-4.exp ---
        FAIL:   abort
	900403_04.C:8: zero width for bit-field `foo'
	--- Running ./g++.other/t01-3.exp ---
        FAIL:   segment violation
	900519_12.C:9: parse error before `;'
	900519_12.C:12: Segmentation violation
	/usr/latest/bin/gcc: Internal compiler error: program cc1plus got fatal signal

                === g++ Summary ===

	# of expected passes 1
	# of expected failures 3
	/usr/latest/bin/g++ version cygnus-2.0.1
	
@end example

@node Debug Log File, , Log File, Output Files
@subsection Debug Log File

With the @code{--debug} option, you can request
a log file showing the output from
Expect itself, running in debugging
mode. This file (@file{dbg.log}, in the directory
where you start @code{runtest}) shows each pattern
Expect considers in analyzing test
output.

This file reflects each @code{send} command,
showing the string sent as input to the tool under test; and
each Expect command, showing each
pattern it compares with the tool output.

@strong{The log messages begin with a message of the form}

@example


	expect: does @{tool output@} (spawn_id n)
	 match pattern @{expected pattern@}?

        
@end example

For every unsuccessful match,
Expect issues a
@emph{no} after this message; if other patterns
are specified for the same Expect
command, they are reflected also, but without the first part of
the message (@emph{expect... match pattern}).

When Expect finds a match, the
log for the successful match ends with @emph{yes},
followed by a record of the Expect
variables set to describe a successful match.

@strong{Here is an excerpt from the debugging log for a
GDB test:}

@example

	send: sent @{break gdbme.c:34\n@} to spawn id 6
	expect: does @{@} (spawn_id 6) match pattern @{Breakpoint.*at.* file
	gdbme.c, line 34.*\(gdb\) $@}? no
	@{.*\(gdb\) $@}? no
	expect: does @{@} (spawn_id 0) match pattern @{return@} ? no
	@{\(y or n\) @}? no
	@{buffer_full@}? no
	@{virtual@}? no
	@{memory@}? no
	@{exhausted@}? no
	@{Undefined@}? no
	@{command@}? no
	break gdbme.c:34
	Breakpoint 8 at 0x23d8: file gdbme.c, line 34.
	(gdb) expect: does @{break gdbme.c:34\r\nBreakpoint 8 at 0x23d8:
	file gdbme.c, line 34.\r\n(gdb) @} (spawn_id 6) match pattern
	@{Breakpoint.*at.* file gdbme.c, line 34.*\(gdb\) $@}? yes
	expect: set expect_out(0,start) @{18@}
	expect: set expect_out(0,end) @{71@}
	expect: set expect_out(0,string) @{Breakpoint 8 at 0x23d8: file
	gdbme.c, line 34.\r\n(gdb) @}
	epect: set expect_out(spawn_id) @{6@}
	expect: set expect_out(buffer) @{break gdbme.c:34\r\nBreakpoint 8
	at 0x23d8: file gdbme.c, line 34.\r\n(gdb) @}
        PASS:   70      0       breakpoint line number in file
	
@end example

This example exhibits three properties of
Expect and
DejaGnu that might be surprising at
first glance:

@itemize 

@item
Empty output for the first attempted match.  The
first set of attempted matches shown ran against the output
@emph{@{@}} --- that is, no
output. Expect begins
attempting to match the patterns supplied immediately; often,
the first pass is against incomplete output (or completely
before all output, as in this case).

@item
Interspersed tool output.  The beginning of
the log entry for the second attempted match may be hard to
spot: this is because the prompt @emph{@{(gdb) @}}
appears on the same line, just before the
@emph{expect:} that marks the beginning of the
log entry.

@item
Fail-safe patterns.  Many of the patterns
tested are fail-safe patterns provided by
GDB testing utilities, to reduce
possible indeterminacy.  It is useful to anticipate potential
variations caused by extreme system conditions
(GDB might issue the message
@emph{virtual memory exhausted} in rare
circumstances), or by changes in the tested program
(@emph{Undefined command} is the likeliest
outcome if the name of a tested command changes).

The pattern @emph{@{return@}} is a
particularly interesting fail-safe to notice; it checks for an
unexpected @key{RET} prompt.  This may happen,
for example, if the tested tool can filter output through a
pager.

These fail-safe patterns (like the debugging log itself)
are primarily useful while developing test scripts.  Use the
@code{error} procedure to make the actions for
fail-safe patterns produce messages starting with
@emph{ERROR} on standard output, and in the
detailed log file.
@end itemize

@node Customizing DejaGnu, Extending DejaGnu, Running Tests, Top
@chapter Customizing DejaGnu

The site configuration file, @file{site.exp},
captures configuration-dependent values and propagates them to the
DejaGnu test environment using Tcl variables.  This ties the
DejaGnu test scripts into the @code{configure} and
@code{make} programs. If this file is setup correctly,
it is possible to execute a testsuite merely by typing
@code{runtest}.

DejaGnu supports two @file{site.exp}
files. The multiple instances of @file{site.exp} are
loaded in a fixed order built into DejaGnu. The first file loaded
is the local file @file{site.exp}, and then the
optional global @file{site.exp} file as
pointed to by the @code{DEJAGNU} environment
variable.

There is an optional @emph{master}
@file{site.exp}, capturing configuration values that
apply to DejaGnu across the board, in each configuration-specific
subdirectory of the DejaGnu library directory.
@code{runtest} loads these values first. The master
@file{site.exp} contains the default values for all
targets and hosts supported by DejaGnu. This master file is
identified by setting the environment variable
@code{DEJAGNU} to the name of the file. This is also
referred to as the ``global'' config file.

Any directory containing a configured testsuite also has a
local @file{site.exp}, capturing configuration values
specific to the tool under test.  Since @code{runtest}
loads these values last, the individual test configuration can
either rely on and use, or override, any of the global values from
the global @file{site.exp} file.

You can usually generate or update the testsuite's local
@file{site.exp} by typing @code{make
site.exp} in the testsuite directory, after the test
suite is configured.

You can also have a file in your home directory called
@file{.dejagnurc}. This gets loaded first before the
other config files. Usually this is used for personal stuff, like
setting the @code{all_flag} so all the output gets
printed, or your own verbosity levels. This file is usually
restricted to setting command line options.

You can further override the default values in a
user-editable section of any @file{site.exp}, or by
setting variables on the @code{runtest} command
line.

@menu
* Local Config File::
* Global Config File::
* Board Config File::
* Remote Host Testing::
* Config File Values::
@end menu

@node Local Config File, Global Config File, , Customizing DejaGnu
@section Local Config File

It is usually more convenient to keep these @emph{manual
overrides} in the @file{site.exp}
local to each test directory, rather than in the global
@file{site.exp} in the installed DejaGnu
library. This file is mostly for supplying tool specific info
that is required by the testsuite.

All local @file{site.exp} files have
two sections, separated by comment text. The first section is
the part that is generated by @code{make}. It is
essentially a collection of Tcl variable definitions based on
@file{Makefile} environment variables. Since they
are generated by @code{make}, they contain the
values as specified by @code{configure}.  (You can
also customize these values by using the @code{--site}
option to @code{configure}.) In particular, this
section contains the @file{Makefile}
variables for host and target configuration data. Do not edit
this first section; if you do, your changes are replaced next
time you run @code{make}.

@strong{The first section starts with}

@example

	## these variables are automatically generated by make ##
	# Do not edit here. If you wish to override these values
	# add them to the last section
	
@end example

In the second section, you can override any default values
(locally to DejaGnu) for all the variables.  The second section
can also contain your preferred defaults for all the command
line options to @code{runtest}. This allows you to
easily customize @code{runtest} for your preferences
in each configured test-suite tree, so that you need not type
options repeatedly on the command line.  (The second section may
also be empty, if you do not wish to override any defaults.)

@strong{The first section ends with this line}

@example

	## All variables above are generated by configure. Do Not Edit ##
	
@end example

You can make any changes under this line. If you wish to
redefine a variable in the top section, then just put a
duplicate value in this second section. Usually the values
defined in this config file are related to the configuration of
the test run. This is the ideal place to set the variables
@code{host_triplet}, @code{build_triplet},
@code{target_triplet}. All other variables are tool
dependent, i.e., for testing a compiler, the value for
@code{CC} might be set to a freshly built binary, as
opposed to one in the user's path.

Here's an example local site.exp file, as used for
GCC/G++ testing.

@strong{Local Config File}

@example

      ## these variables are automatically generated by make ##
      # Do not edit here. If you wish to override these values
      # add them to the last section
      set rootme "/build/devo-builds/i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1/gcc"
      set host_triplet i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1
      set build_triplet i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1
      set target_triplet i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1
      set target_alias i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1
      set CFLAGS ""
      set CXXFLAGS "-isystem /build/devo-builds/i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1/gcc/../libio -isystem $srcdir/../libg++/src -isystem $srcdir/../libio -isystem $srcdir/../libstdc++ -isystem $srcdir/../libstdc++/stl -L/build/devo-builds/i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1/gcc/../libg++ -L/build/devo-builds/i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1/gcc/../libstdc++"
      append LDFLAGS " -L/build/devo-builds/i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1/gcc/../ld"
      set tmpdir /build/devo-builds/i586-pc-linux-gnulibc1/gcc/testsuite
      set srcdir "$@{srcdir@}/testsuite"
      ## All variables above are generated by configure. Do Not Edit ##

      
@end example

This file defines the required fields for a local config
file, namely the three config triplets, and the srcdir. It also
defines several other Tcl variables that are used exclusively by
the GCC testsuite. For most test cases, the CXXFLAGS and LDFLAGS
are supplied by DejaGnu itself for cross testing, but to test a
compiler, GCC needs to manipulate these itself.

@node Global Config File, Board Config File, Local Config File, Customizing DejaGnu
@section Global Config File

The master config file is where all the target specific
config variables for a whole site get set. The idea is
that for a centralized testing lab where people have to share a
target between multiple developers. There are settings for both
remote targets and remote hosts.  Here's an example of a Master
Config File (also called the Global config file) for a
@emph{canadian cross}. A canadian cross is when
you build and test a cross compiler on a machine other than the
one it's to be hosted on.

Here we have the config settings for our California
office. Note that all config values are site dependent. Here we
have two sets of values that we use for testing m68k-aout cross
compilers. As both of these target boards has a different
debugging protocol, we test on both of them in sequence.

@strong{Global Config file}

@example


      # Make sure we look in the right place for the board description files.
      if ![info exists boards_dir] @{
          set boards_dir @{@}
      @}
      lappend boards_dir "/nfs/cygint/s1/cygnus/dejagnu/boards"

      verbose "Global Config File: target_triplet is $target_triplet" 2
      global target_list

      case "$target_triplet" in @{
          @{ "native" @} @{
              set target_list "unix"
          @}
          @{ "sparc64-*elf" @} @{
              set target_list "sparc64-sim"
          @}
          @{ "mips-*elf" @} @{
              set target_list "mips-sim wilma barney"
          @}
          @{ "mips-lsi-elf" @} @{
              set target_list "mips-lsi-sim@{,soft-float,el@}"
          @}
          @{ "sh-*hms" @} @{
              set target_list @{ "sh-hms-sim" "bloozy" @}
          @}
      @}
      
@end example

In this case, we have support for several cross compilers,
that all run on this host. For testing on operating systems that
don't support Expect, DejaGnu can be run on the local build
machine, and it can connect to the remote host and run all the
tests for this cross compiler on that host. All the remote OS
requires is a working telnetd.

As you can see, all one does is set the variable
@code{target_list} to the list of targets and options to
test. The simple settings, like for
@emph{sparc64-elf} only require setting the name of
the single board config file. The @emph{mips-elf}
target is more complicated. Here it sets the list to three target
boards. One is the default mips target, and both
@emph{wilma} @emph{barney} are
symbolic names for other mips boards. Symbolic names are covered
in the @ref{Adding A New Board} chapter. The more complicated
example is the one for @emph{mips-lsi-elf}. This one
runs the tests with multiple iterations using all possible
combinations of the @code{--soft-float} and the
@code{--el} (little endian) option. Needless to say,
this last feature is mostly compiler specific.

@node Board Config File, Remote Host Testing, Global Config File, Customizing DejaGnu
@section Board Config File

The board config file is where board specific config data
is stored. A board config file contains all the higher-level
configuration settings. There is a rough inheritance scheme, where it is
possible to base a new board description file on an existing one. There
are also collections of custom procedures for common environments. For
more information on adding a new board config file, go to the @ref{Adding A New Board} chapter. 

An example board config file for a GNU simulator is as
follows. @code{set_board_info} is a procedure that sets the
field name to the specified value. The procedures in square brackets
@emph{[]} are @emph{helper procedures}. These
are used to find parts of a tool chain required to build an executable
image that may reside in various locations. This is mostly of use for
when the startup code, the standard C libraries, or the tool chain itself
is part of your build tree.

@strong{Board Config File}

@example

      # This is a list of toolchains that are supported on this board.
      set_board_info target_install @{sparc64-elf@}

      # Load the generic configuration for this board. This will define any
      # routines needed by the tool to communicate with the board.
      load_generic_config "sim"

      # We need this for find_gcc and *_include_flags/*_link_flags.
      load_base_board_description "basic-sim"

      # Use long64 by default.
      process_multilib_options "long64"

      setup_sim sparc64

      # We only support newlib on this target. We assume that all multilib
      # options have been specified before we get here.
      set_board_info compiler  "[find_gcc]"
      set_board_info cflags  "[libgloss_include_flags] [newlib_include_flags]"
      set_board_info ldflags  "[libgloss_link_flags] [newlib_link_flags]"
      # No linker script.
      set_board_info ldscript "";

      # Used by a few gcc.c-torture testcases to delimit how large the
      # stack can be.
      set_board_info gcc,stack_size 16384
      # The simulator doesn't return exit statuses and we need to indicate this
      # the standard GCC wrapper will work with this target.
      set_board_info needs_status_wrapper 1
      # We can't pass arguments to programs.
      set_board_info noargs 1
      
@end example

There are five helper procedures used in this example. The first
one, @code{find gcc} looks for a copy of the GNU compiler in
your build tree, or it uses the one in your path. This will also return
the proper transformed name for a cross compiler if you whole build tree
is configured for one. The next helper procedures are
@code{libgloss_include_flags} &
@code{libgloss_link_flags}. These return the proper flags to
compiler and link an executable image using @ref{Libgloss}, the GNU BSP (Board Support Package). The final
procedures are @code{newlib_include_flag} &
@code{newlib_include_flag}. These find the Newlib C
library, which is a reentrant standard C library for embedded systems
comprising of non GPL'd code.

@node Remote Host Testing, Config File Values, Board Config File, Customizing DejaGnu
@section Remote Host Testing

@quotation

@strong{Note}

Thanks to Dj Delorie for the original paper that
this section is based on.
@end quotation

DejaGnu also supports running the tests on a remote
host. To set this up, the remote host needs an ftp server, and a
telnet server. Currently foreign operating systems used as
remote hosts are VxWorks, VRTX, DOS/Windows 3.1, MacOS and Windows.

The recommended source for a Windows-based FTP
server is to get IIS (either IIS 1 or Personal Web Server) from
@uref{http://www.microsoft.com,http://www.microsoft.com}.
When you install it, make sure you install the FTP server - it's
not selected by default. Go into the IIS manager and change the
FTP server so that it does not allow anonymous FTP. Set the home
directory to the root directory (i.e. c:\) of a suitable
drive. Allow writing via FTP.

It will create an account like IUSR_FOOBAR where foobar is
the name of your machine. Go into the user editor and give that
account a password that you don't mind hanging around in the
clear (i.e. not the same as your admin or personal
passwords). Also, add it to all the various permission groups.

You'll also need a telnet server. For Windows, go
to the @uref{http://ataman.com,Ataman} web site,
pick up the Ataman Remote Logon Services for Windows, and
install it. You can get started on the eval period anyway. Add
IUSR_FOOBAR to the list of allowed users, set the HOME directory
to be the same as the FTP default directory. Change the Mode
prompt to simple.

Ok, now you need to pick a directory name to do all the
testing in. For the sake of this example, we'll call it piggy
(i.e. c:\piggy). Create this directory.

You'll need a unix machine. Create a directory for the
scripts you'll need. For this example, we'll use
/usr/local/swamp/testing. You'll need to have a source tree
somewhere, say /usr/src/devo. Now, copy some files from
releng's area in SV to your machine:

@strong{Remote host setup}

@example

      cd /usr/local/swamp/testing
      mkdir boards
      scp darkstar.welcomehome.org:/dejagnu/cst/bin/MkTestDir .
      scp darkstar.welcomehome.org:/dejagnu/site.exp .
      scp darkstar.welcomehome.org:/dejagnu/boards/useless98r2.exp boards/foobar.exp
      export DEJAGNU=/usr/local/swamp/testing/site.exp

      
@end example

You must edit the boards/foobar.exp file to reflect your
machine; change the hostname (foobar.com), username
(iusr_foobar), password, and ftp_directory (c:/piggy) to match
what you selected.

Edit the global @file{ site.exp} to reflect your
boards directory:

@strong{Add The Board Directory}

@example

	lappend boards_dir "/usr/local/swamp/testing/boards"
	
@end example

Now run MkTestDir, which is in the contrib
directory. The first parameter is the toolchain prefix, the
second is the location of your devo tree. If you are testing a
cross compiler (ex: you have sh-hms-gcc.exe in your PATH on
the PC), do something like this:

@strong{Setup Cross Remote Testing}

@example

	./MkTestDir sh-hms /usr/dejagnu/src/devo
	
@end example

If you are testing a native PC compiler (ex: you have
gcc.exe in your PATH on the PC), do this:

@strong{Setup Native Remote Testing}

@example

	./MkTestDir '' /usr/dejagnu/src/devo
	
@end example

To test the setup, @code{ftp} to your PC
using the username (iusr_foobar) and password you selected. CD
to the test directory. Upload a file to the PC. Now telnet to
your PC using the same username and password. CD to the test
directory. Make sure the file is there. Type "set" and/or "gcc
-v" (or sh-hms-gcc -v) and make sure the default PATH contains
the installation you want to test.

@strong{Run Test Remotely}

@example

	cd /usr/local/swamp/testing
	make  -k -w check RUNTESTFLAGS="--host_board foobar --target_board foobar -v -v" > check.out 2>&1
	
@end example

To run a specific test, use a command like this (for
this example, you'd run this from the gcc directory that
MkTestDir created):

@strong{Run a Test Remotely}

@example

	make check RUNTESTFLAGS="--host_board sloth --target_board sloth -v compile.exp=921202-1.c"
	
@end example

Note: if you are testing a cross-compiler, put in the
correct target board. You'll also have to download more .exp
files and modify them for your local configuration. The -v's
are optional.

@node Config File Values, , Remote Host Testing, Customizing DejaGnu
@section Config File Values

DejaGnu uses a named array in Tcl to hold all the info for
each machine. In the case of a canadian cross, this means host
information as well as target information. The named array is
called @code{target_info}, and it has two indices. The
following fields are part of the array.

@menu
* Command Line Option Variables: Option Variables.
* Personal Config File::
@end menu

@node Option Variables, Personal Config File, , Config File Values
@subsection Command Line Option Variables

In the user editable second section of the @ref{Personal Config File} you can not only override the configuration
variables captured in the first section, but also specify
default values for all on the @code{runtest}
command line options.  Save for @code{--debug},
@code{--help}, and @code{--version}, each
command line option has an associated Tcl variable.  Use the
Tcl @code{set} command to specify a new default
value (as for the configuration variables).  The following
table describes the correspondence between command line
options and variables you can set in
@file{site.exp}.  @ref{Invoking Runtest}, for
explanations of the command-line options.


@strong{Tcl Variables For Command Line Options}

@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
@item
runtest@tab Tcl@tab option@tab variable@tab description
@item
--all@tab all_flag@tab display all test results if set@tab 
@item
--baud@tab baud@tab set the default baud rate to something other than
9600.@tab 
@item
--connect@tab connectmode@tab @code{rlogin},
@code{telnet}, @code{rsh},
@code{kermit}, @code{tip}, or
@code{mondfe}@tab 
@item
--outdir@tab outdir@tab directory for @file{tool.sum} and
@file{tool.log.}@tab 
@item
--objdir@tab objdir@tab directory for pre-compiled binaries@tab 
@item
--reboot@tab reboot@tab reboot the target if set to
@emph{"1"}; do not reboot if set to
@emph{"0"} (the default).@tab 
@item
--srcdir@tab srcdir@tab directory of test subdirectories@tab 
@item
--strace@tab tracelevel@tab a number: Tcl trace depth@tab 
@item
--tool@tab tool@tab name of tool to test; identifies init, test subdir@tab 
@item
--verbose@tab verbose@tab verbosity level.  As option, use multiple times; as
variable, set a number, 0 or greater.@tab 
@item
--target@tab target_triplet@tab The canonical configuration string for the target.@tab 
@item
--host@tab host_triplet@tab The canonical configuration string for the host.@tab 
@item
--build@tab build_triplet@tab The canonical configuration string for the build
host.@tab 
@item
--mail@tab address@tab Email the output log to the specified address.@tab 
@end multitable

@node Personal Config File, , Option Variables, Config File Values
@subsection Personal Config File

The personal config file is used to customize
@code{runtest's} behaviour for each person. It is
typically used to set the user preferred setting for verbosity,
and any experimental Tcl procedures. My personal
@file{~/.dejagnurc} file looks like:

@strong{Personal Config File}

@example

	set all_flag 1
	set RLOGIN /usr/ucb/rlogin
	set RSH /usr/local/sbin/ssh
	
@end example

Here I set @code{all_flag} so I see all the test
cases that PASS along with the ones that FAIL. I also set
@code{RLOGIN} to the BSD version. I have
Kerberos installed, and when I rlogin
to a target board, it usually isn't supported. So I use the non
secure version rather than the default that's in my path. I also
set @code{RSH} to the SSH
secure shell, as rsh is mostly used to test unix
machines within a local network here.

@node Extending DejaGnu, Unit Testing, Customizing DejaGnu, Top
@chapter Extending DejaGnu

@menu
* Adding A New Testsuite: Adding a new Testsuite.
* Adding A New Tool::
* Adding A New Target::
* Adding A New Board::
* Board Config File Values: Board File Values.
* Writing A Test Case::
* Debugging A Test Case::
* Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite.: Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite.
* Hints On Writing A Test Case::
* Special variables used by test cases.: Test Case Variables.
@end menu

@node Adding a new Testsuite, Adding A New Tool, , Extending DejaGnu
@section Adding A New Testsuite

The testsuite for a new tool should always be located in that tools
source directory. DejaGnu require the directory be named
@file{testsuite}. Under this directory, the test cases go
in a subdirectory whose name begins with the tool name. For example, for
a tool named @emph{flubber}, each subdirectory containing
testsuites must start with @emph{"flubber."}.

@node Adding A New Tool, Adding A New Target, Adding a new Testsuite, Extending DejaGnu
@section Adding A New Tool

In general, the best way to learn how to write (code or even prose)
is to read something similar.  This principle applies to test cases and
to testsuites.  Unfortunately, well-established testsuites have a way
of developing their own conventions: as test writers become more
experienced with DejaGnu and with Tcl, they accumulate more utilities,
and take advantage of more and more features of
Expect and Tcl in
general.

Inspecting such established testsuites may make the prospect of
creating an entirely new testsuite appear overwhelming.  Nevertheless,
it is quite straightforward to get a new testsuite going.

There is one testsuite that is guaranteed not to grow more
elaborate over time: both it and the tool it tests were created expressly
to illustrate what it takes to get started with DejaGnu.  The
@file{example/} directory of the DejaGnu distribution
contains both an interactive tool called @code{calc}, and a
testsuite for it.  Reading this testsuite, and experimenting with it,
is a good way to supplement the information in this section.  (Thanks to
Robert Lupton for creating calc and its testsuite---and also the first
version of this section of the manual!)

To help orient you further in this task, here is an outline of the
steps to begin building a testsuite for a program example.

@itemize 

@item
Create or select a directory to contain your new
collection of tests. Change into that directory (shown here as
@file{testsuite}):

Create a @file{configure.in} file in this directory,
to control configuration-dependent choices for your tests.  So far as
DejaGnu is concerned, the important thing is to set a value for the
variable @code{target_abbrev}; this value is the link to the
init file you will write soon.  (For simplicity, we assume the
environment is Unix, and use @emph{unix} as the
value.)

What else is needed in @file{configure.in} depends on
the requirements of your tool, your intended test environments, and which
configure system you use.  This example is a minimal configure.in for use
with GNU Autoconf. 

@item
Create @file{Makefile.in} (if you are using
Autoconf), or @file{Makefile.am}(if you are using
Automake), the source file used by configure to build your
@file{Makefile}. If you are using GNU Automake.just add the
keyword @emph{dejagnu} to the
@emph{AUTOMAKE_OPTIONS} variable in your
@file{Makefile.am} file. This will add all the Makefile
support needed to run DejaGnu, and support the @ref{Make Check}
target.

You also need to include two targets important to DejaGnu:
@emph{check}, to run the tests, and
@emph{site.exp}, to set up the Tcl copies of
configuration-dependent values. This is called the @ref{Local Config File}
The check target must run the @code{runtest} program to
execute the tests.

The @file{site.exp} target should usually set up
(among other things) the $tool variable for the name of your program. If
the local site.exp file is setup correctly, it is possible to execute the
tests by merely typing @code{runtest} on the command
line.

@strong{Sample Makefile.in Fragment}

@example

	# Look for a local version of DejaGnu, otherwise use one in the path
	RUNTEST = `if test -f $(top_srcdir)/../dejagnu/runtest; then \
	      echo $(top_srcdir) ../dejagnu/runtest; \
	    else \
	       echo runtest; \
	     fi`

	# The flags to pass to runtest
	RUNTESTFLAGS =

	# Execute the tests
	check: site.exp all
        $(RUNTEST) $(RUNTESTFLAGS) \
            --tool $@{example@} --srcdir $(srcdir)

	# Make the local config file
	site.exp: ./config.status Makefile
	    @@echo "Making a new config file..."
            -@@rm -f ./tmp?
            @@touch site.exp

            -@@mv site.exp site.bak
            @@echo "## these variables are automatically\
 generated by make ##" > ./tmp0
	    @@echo "# Do not edit here. If you wish to\
 override these values" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "# add them to the last section" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set host_os $@{host_os@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set host_alias $@{host_alias@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set host_cpu $@{host_cpu@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set host_vendor $@{host_vendor@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set target_os $@{target_os@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set target_alias $@{target_alias@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set target_cpu $@{target_cpu@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set target_vendor $@{target_vendor@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set host_triplet $@{host_canonical@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set target_triplet $@{target_canonical@}">>./tmp0
            @@echo "set tool binutils" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set srcdir $@{srcdir@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set objdir `pwd`" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "set $@{examplename@} $@{example@}" >> ./tmp0
            @@echo "## All variables above are generated by\
 configure. Do Not Edit ##" >> ./tmp0
            @@cat ./tmp0 > site.exp
            @@sed < site.bak \
               -e '1,/^## All variables above are.*##/ d' \
               >> site.exp
            -@@rm -f ./tmp?

	    
@end example

@item
Create a directory (in @file{testsuite})
called @file{config}. Make a @emph{Tool Init
File} in this directory. Its name must start with the
@code{target_abbrev} value, or be named
@file{default.exp} so call it
@file{config/unix.exp} for our Unix based example. This
is the file that contains the target-dependent procedures.
Fortunately, on Unix, most of them do not have to do very much in
order for @code{runtest} to run.

If the program being tested is not interactive, you can get
away with this minimal @file{unix.exp} to begin
with:

@strong{Simple Batch Program Tool Init File}

@example


	  proc foo_exit @{@} @{@}
	  proc foo_version @{@} @{@}

	  
@end example

If the program being tested is interactive, however, you might
as well define a @emph{start} routine and invoke it by
using an init file like this:

@strong{Simple Interactive Program Tool Init File}

@example

	
	  proc foo_exit @{@} @{@}
	  proc foo_version @{@} @{@}

	  proc foo_start @{@} @{
	    global $@{examplename@}
	    spawn $@{examplename@}
	    expect @{
	        -re "" @{@}
	    @}
	  @}

	  # Start the program running we want to test
	  foo_start

	  
@end example

@item
Create a directory whose name begins with your tool's
name, to contain tests. For example, if your tool's name is
@emph{gcc}, then the directories all need to start with
@emph{"gcc."}.

@item
Create a sample test file. Its name must end with
@file{.exp}. You can use
@file{first-try.exp}. To begin with, just write there a
line of Tcl code to issue a message.

@strong{Testing A New Tool Config}

@example


	  send_user "Testing: one, two...\n"

	  
@end example

@item
Back in the @file{testsuite} (top
level) directory, run @code{configure}. Typically you do
this while in the build directory. You may have to specify more of a
path, if a suitable configure is not available in your execution
path.

@item
You are now ready to triumphantly type @code{make
check} or @code{runtest}.  You should see
something like this:

@strong{Example Test Case Run}

@example

	  Test Run By rhl on Fri Jan 29 16:25:44 EST 1993

                === example tests ===

	  Running ./example.0/first-try.exp ...
	  Testing: one, two...

                === example Summary ===

	 
@end example

There is no output in the summary, because so far the example
does not call any of the procedures that establish a test
outcome.

@item
Write some real tests. For an interactive tool, you
should probably write a real exit routine in fairly short order. In
any case, you should also write a real version routine
soon. 
@end itemize

@node Adding A New Target, Adding A New Board, Adding A New Tool, Extending DejaGnu
@section Adding A New Target

DejaGnu has some additional requirements for target support, beyond
the general-purpose provisions of configure. DejaGnu must actively
communicate with the target, rather than simply generating or managing
code for the target architecture.  Therefore, each tool requires an
initialization module for each target.  For new targets, you must supply
a few Tcl procedures to adapt DejaGnu to the target.  This permits
DejaGnu itself to remain target independent.

Usually the best way to write a new initialization module is to
edit an existing initialization module; some trial and error will be
required. If necessary, you can use the @@samp@{--debug@} option to see what
is really going on.

When you code an initialization module, be generous in printing
information controlled by the @code{verbose}
procedure.

For cross targets, most of the work is in getting the
communications right. Communications code (for several situations
involving IP networks or serial lines) is available in a DejaGnu library
file.

If you suspect a communication problem, try running the connection
interactively from Expect.  (There are three
ways of running Expect as an interactive
interpreter.  You can run Expect with no
arguments, and control it completely interactively; or you can use
@code{expect -i} together with other command-line options and
arguments; or you can run the command @code{interpreter} from
any Expect procedure.  Use
@code{return} to get back to the calling procedure (if any),
or @code{return -tcl} to make the calling procedure itself
return to its caller; use @code{exit} or end-of-file to leave
Expect altogether.)  Run the program whose name is recorded in
@code{$connectmode}, with the arguments in
@code{$targetname}, to establish a connection.  You should at
least be able to get a prompt from any target that is physically
connected.

@node Adding A New Board, Board File Values, Adding A New Target, Extending DejaGnu
@section Adding A New Board

Adding a new board consists of creating a new board config
file. Examples are in
@file{dejagnu/baseboards}. Usually to make a new
board file, it's easiest to copy an existing one. It is also
possible to have your file be based on a
@emph{baseboard} file with only one or two
changes needed. Typically, this can be as simple as just
changing the linker script. Once the new baseboard file is done,
add it to the @code{boards_DATA} list in the
@file{dejagnu/baseboards/Makefile.am}, and regenerate the
Makefile.in using automake. Then just rebuild and install DejaGnu. You
can test it by:

There is a crude inheritance scheme going on with board files, so
you can include one board file into another, The two main procedures used
to do this are @code{load_generic_config} and
@code{load_base_board_description}. The generic config file
contains other procedures used for a certain class of target. The
board description file is where the board specific settings go. Commonly
there are similar target environments with just different
processors.

@strong{Testing a New Board Config File}

@example

      make check RUNTESTFLAGS="--target_board=newboardfile".
      
@end example

Here's an example of a board config file. There are
several @emph{helper procedures} used in this
example. A helper procedure is one that look for a tool of files
in commonly installed locations. These are mostly used when
testing in the build tree, because the executables to be tested
are in the same tree as the new dejagnu files. The helper
procedures are the ones in square braces
@emph{[]}, which is the Tcl execution characters.

@strong{Example Board Config File}

@example


      # Load the generic configuration for this board. This will define a basic
      # set of routines needed by the tool to communicate with the board.
      load_generic_config "sim"

      # basic-sim.exp is a basic description for the standard Cygnus simulator.
      load_base_board_description "basic-sim"

      # The compiler used to build for this board. This has *nothing* to do
      # with what compiler is tested if we're testing gcc.
      set_board_info compiler "[find_gcc]"

      # We only support newlib on this target.
      # However, we include libgloss so we can find the linker scripts.
      set_board_info cflags "[newlib_include_flags] [libgloss_include_flags]"
      set_board_info ldflags "[newlib_link_flags]"

      # No linker script for this board.
      set_board_info ldscript "-Tsim.ld";

      # The simulator doesn't return exit statuses and we need to indicate this.
      set_board_info needs_status_wrapper 1

      # Can't pass arguments to this target.
      set_board_info noargs 1

      # No signals.
      set_board_info gdb,nosignals 1

      # And it can't call functions.
      set_board_info gdb,cannot_call_functions 1

      
@end example

@node Board File Values, Writing A Test Case, Adding A New Board, Extending DejaGnu
@section Board Config File Values

These fields are all in the @code{board_info} These are
all set by using the @code{set_board_info} procedure. The
parameters are the field name, followed by the value to set the field
to.


@strong{Common Board Info Fields}

@multitable @columnfractions 0.333333333333333 0.333333333333333 0.333333333333333
@item
Field@tab Sample Value@tab Description
@item
compiler@tab "[find_gcc]"@tab The path to the compiler to use.
@item
cflags@tab "-mca"@tab Compilation flags for the compiler.
@item
ldflags@tab "[libgloss_link_flags] [newlib_link_flags]"@tab Linking flags for the compiler.
@item
ldscript@tab "-Wl,-Tidt.ld"@tab The linker script to use when cross compiling.
@item
libs@tab "-lgcc"@tab Any additional libraries to link in.
@item
shell_prompt@tab "cygmon>"@tab The command prompt of the remote shell.
@item
hex_startaddr@tab "0xa0020000"@tab The Starting address as a string.
@item
start_addr@tab 0xa0008000@tab The starting address as a value.
@item
startaddr@tab "a0020000"@tab 
@item
exit_statuses_bad@tab 1@tab Whether there is an accurate exit status.
@item
reboot_delay@tab 10@tab The delay between power off and power on.
@item
unreliable@tab 1@tab Whether communication with the board is unreliable.
@item
sim@tab [find_sim]@tab The path to the simulator to use.
@item
objcopy@tab $tempfil@tab The path to the @code{objcopy} program.
@item
support_libs@tab "$@{prefix_dir@}/i386-coff/"@tab Support libraries needed for cross compiling.
@item
addl_link_flags@tab "-N"@tab Additional link flags, rarely used.
@end multitable

These fields are used by the GCC and GDB tests, and are mostly
only useful to somewhat trying to debug a new board file for one of
these tools. Many of these are used only by a few testcases, and their
purpose is esoteric. These are listed with sample values as a guide to
better guessing if you need to change any of these.


@strong{Board Info Fields For GCC & GDB}

@multitable @columnfractions 0.333333333333333 0.333333333333333 0.333333333333333
@item
Field@tab Sample Value@tab Description
@item
strip@tab $tempfile@tab Strip the executable of symbols.
@item
gdb_load_offset@tab "0x40050000"@tab 
@item
gdb_protocol@tab "remote"@tab The GDB debugging protocol to use.
@item
gdb_sect_offset@tab "0x41000000";@tab 
@item
gdb_stub_ldscript@tab "-Wl,-Teva-stub.ld"@tab The linker script to use with a GDB stub.
@item
gdb_init_command@tab "set mipsfpu none"@tab 
@item
gdb,cannot_call_functions@tab 1@tab Whether GDB can call functions on the target,
@item
gdb,noargs@tab 1@tab Whether the target can take command line arguments.
@item
gdb,nosignals@tab 1@tab Whether there are signals on the target.
@item
gdb,short_int@tab 1@tab 
@item
gdb,start_symbol@tab "_start";@tab The starting symbol in the executable.
@item
gdb,target_sim_options@tab "-sparclite"@tab Special options to pass to the simulator.
@item
gdb,timeout@tab 540@tab Timeout value to use for remote communication.
@item
gdb_init_command@tab "print/x \$fsr = 0x0"@tab 
@item
gdb_load_offset@tab "0x12020000"@tab 
@item
gdb_opts@tab "--command gdbinit"@tab 
@item
gdb_prompt@tab "\\(gdb960\\)"@tab The prompt GDB is using.
@item
gdb_run_command@tab "jump start"@tab 
@item
gdb_stub_offset@tab "0x12010000"@tab 
@item
use_gdb_stub@tab 1@tab Whether to use a GDB stub.
@item
use_vma_offset@tab 1@tab 
@item
wrap_m68k_aout@tab 1@tab 
@item
gcc,no_label_values@tab 1@tab 
@item
gcc,no_trampolines@tab 1@tab 
@item
gcc,no_varargs@tab 1@tab 
@item
gcc,stack_size@tab 16384@tab Stack size to use with some GCC testcases.
@item
ieee_multilib_flags@tab "-mieee";@tab 
@item
is_simulator@tab 1@tab 
@item
needs_status_wrapper@tab 1@tab 
@item
no_double@tab 1@tab 
@item
no_long_long@tab 1@tab 
@item
noargs@tab 1@tab 
@item
nullstone,lib@tab "mips-clock.c"@tab 
@item
nullstone,ticks_per_sec@tab 3782018@tab 
@item
sys_speed_value@tab 200@tab 
@item
target_install@tab @{sh-hms@}@tab 
@end multitable

@node Writing A Test Case, Debugging A Test Case, Board File Values, Extending DejaGnu
@section Writing A Test Case

The easiest way to prepare a new test case is to base it
on an existing one for a similar situation.  There are two major
categories of tests: batch or interactive.  Batch oriented tests
are usually easier to write.

The GCC tests are a good example of batch oriented tests.
All GCC tests consist primarily of a call to a single common
procedure, since all the tests either have no output, or only
have a few warning messages when successfully compiled.  Any
non-warning output is a test failure.  All the C code needed is
kept in the test directory.  The test driver, written in Tcl,
need only get a listing of all the C files in the directory, and
compile them all using a generic procedure. This procedure and a
few others supporting for these tests are kept in the library
module @file{lib/c-torture.exp} in the GCC test
suite. Most tests of this kind use very few
expect features, and are coded almost
purely in Tcl.

Writing the complete suite of C tests, then, consisted of
these steps:

@itemize 

@item
Copying all the C code into the test directory.
These tests were based on the C-torture test created by Torbjorn
Granlund (on behalf of the Free Software Foundation) for GCC
development.

@item
Writing (and debugging) the generic Tcl procedures for
compilation.

@item
Writing the simple test driver: its main task is to
search the directory (using the Tcl procedure
@emph{glob} for filename expansion with wildcards)
and call a Tcl procedure with each filename.  It also checks for
a few errors from the testing procedure.
@end itemize

Testing interactive programs is intrinsically more
complex.  Tests for most interactive programs require some trial
and error before they are complete.

However, some interactive programs can be tested in a
simple fashion reminiscent of batch tests.  For example, prior
to the creation of DejaGnu, the GDB distribution already
included a wide-ranging testing procedure.  This procedure was
very robust, and had already undergone much more debugging and
error checking than many recent DejaGnu test cases.
Accordingly, the best approach was simply to encapsulate the
existing GDB tests, for reporting purposes. Thereafter, new GDB
tests built up a family of Tcl procedures specialized for GDB
testing.

@node Debugging A Test Case, Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite, Writing A Test Case, Extending DejaGnu
@section Debugging A Test Case

These are the kinds of debugging information available
from DejaGnu:

@itemize 

@item
Output controlled by test scripts themselves,
explicitly allowed for by the test author.  This kind of
debugging output appears in the detailed output recorded in the
DejaGnu log file.  To do the same for new tests, use the
@code{verbose} procedure (which in turn uses the
variable also called @emph{verbose}) to control
how much output to generate.  This will make it easier for other
people running the test to debug it if necessary.  Whenever
possible, if @emph{$verbose} is
@emph{0}, there should be no output other than the
output from @emph{pass},
@emph{fail}, @emph{error}, and
@emph{warning}.  Then, to whatever extent is
appropriate for the particular test, allow successively higher
values of @emph{$verbose} to generate more
information.  Be kind to other programmers who use your tests:
provide for a lot of debugging information.

@item
Output from the internal debugging functions of
Tcl and Expect. There is a command
line options for each; both forms of debugging output are
recorded in the file @file{dbg.log} in the current
directory.

Use @code{--debug} for information from the
expect level; it generates displays of the expect attempts to
match the tool output with the patterns specified. This output
can be very helpful while developing test scripts, since it
shows precisely the characters received.  Iterating between the
latest attempt at a new test script and the corresponding
@file{dbg.log} can allow you to create the final
patterns by ``cut and paste''.  This is sometimes the best way
to write a test case.

@item
Use @code{--strace} to see more
detail at the Tcl level; this shows how Tcl procedure
definitions expand, as they execute. The associated number
controls the depth of definitions expanded.

@item
Finally, if the value of
@emph{verbose} is 3 or greater,DejaGnu turns on
the expect command @code{log_user}.  This command
prints all expect actions to the expect standard output, to the
detailed log file, and (if @code{--debug} is on) to
@file{dbg.log}.
@end itemize

@node Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite, Hints On Writing A Test Case, Debugging A Test Case, Extending DejaGnu
@section Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite.

There are two slightly different ways to add a test
case. One is to add the test case to an existing directory. The
other is to create a new directory to hold your test. The
existing test directories represent several styles of testing,
all of which are slightly different; examine the directories for
the tool of interest to see which (if any) is most suitable.

Adding a GCC test can be very simple: just add the C code
to any directory beginning with @file{gcc}. and it
runs on the next 

@example
runtest --tool
      gcc
@end example

@noindent
.

To add a test to GDB, first add any source code you will
need to the test directory. Then you can either create a new
expect file, or add your test to an existing one (any
file with a @emph{.exp} suffix).  Creating a new
.exp file is probably a better idea if the test is significantly
different from existing tests. Adding it as a separate file also
makes upgrading easier. If the C code has to be already compiled
before the test will run, then you'll have to add it to the
@file{Makefile.in} file for that test directory,
then run @code{configure} and
@code{make}.

Adding a test by creating a new directory is very
similar:

@itemize 

@item
Create the new directory. All subdirectory names
begin with the name of the tool to test; e.g. G++ tests might be
in a directory called @file{g++.other}. There can
be multiple test directories that start with the same tool name
(such as @emph{g++}).

@item
Add the new directory name to the
@code{configdirs} definition in the
@file{configure.in} file for the testsuite
directory. This way when @code{make} and
@code{configure} next run, they include the new
directory.

@item
Add the new test case to the directory, as
above. 

@item
To add support in the new directory for
configure and make, you must also create a
@file{Makefile.in} and a
@file{configure.in}.
@end itemize

@node Hints On Writing A Test Case, Test Case Variables, Adding A Test Case To A Testsuite, Extending DejaGnu
@section Hints On Writing A Test Case

It is safest to write patterns that match all the output
generated by the tested program; this is called closure.
If a pattern does not match the entire output, any output that
remains will be examined by the next @code{expect}
command. In this situation, the precise boundary that determines
which @code{expect} command sees what is very
sensitive to timing between the Expect task and the task running
the tested tool.  As a result, the test may sometimes appear to
work, but is likely to have unpredictable results. (This problem
is particularly likely for interactive tools, but can also
affect batch tools---especially for tests that take a long time
to finish.) The best way to ensure closure is to use the
@code{-re} option for the @code{expect}
command to write the pattern as a full regular expressions; then
you can match the end of output using a @emph{$}.
It is also a good idea to write patterns that match all
available output by using @emph{.*\} after the
text of interest; this will also match any intervening blank
lines.  Sometimes an alternative is to match end of line using
@emph{\r} or @emph{\n}, but this is
usually too dependent on terminal settings.

Always escape punctuation, such as @emph{(}
or @emph{"}, in your patterns; for example, write
@emph{\(}.  If you forget to escape punctuation,
you will usually see an error message like 

@example
extra
      characters after close-quote.
@end example

If you have trouble understanding why a pattern does not
match the program output, try using the @code{--debug}
option to @code{runtest}, and examine the debug log
carefully.

Be careful not to neglect output generated by setup rather
than by the interesting parts of a test case.  For example,
while testing GDB, I issue a send @emph{set height
0\n} command.  The purpose is simply to make sure GDB
never calls a paging program.  The @emph{set
height} command in GDB does not generate any
output; but running any command makes GDB issue a new
@emph{(gdb) } prompt.  If there were no
@code{expect} command to match this prompt, the
output @emph{(gdb) } begins the text seen by the
next @code{expect} command---which might make that
pattern fail to match.

To preserve basic sanity, I also recommended that no test
ever pass if there was any kind of problem in the test case.  To
take an extreme case, tests that pass even when the tool will
not spawn are misleading. Ideally, a test in this sort of
situation should not fail either. Instead, print an error
message by calling one of the DejaGnu procedures
@code{error} or @code{warning}.

@node Test Case Variables, , Hints On Writing A Test Case, Extending DejaGnu
@section Special variables used by test cases.

There are special variables used by test cases. These contain
other information from DejaGnu. Your test cases can use these variables,
with conventional meanings (as well as the variables saved in
@file{site.exp}. You can use the value of these variables,
but they should never be changed.

@table @asis

@item $prms_id
The tracking system (e.g. GNATS) number identifying
a corresponding bugreport.  (@emph{0}@} if you do not
specify it in the test script.)

@item $item bug_id
An optional bug id; may reflect a bug
identification from another organization.  (@emph{0}
if you do not specify it.)

@item $subdir
The subdirectory for the current test
case.

@item $expect_out(buffer)
The output from the last command. This is an
internal variable set by Expect. More information can be found in
the Expect manual.

@item $exec_output
This is the output from a
@code{$@{tool@}_load} command. This only applies to
tools like GCC and GAS which produce an object file that must in
turn be executed to complete a test.

@item $comp_output
This is the output from a
@code{$@{tool@}_start} command.  This is conventionally
used for batch oriented programs, like GCC and GAS, that may
produce interesting output (warnings, errors) without further
interaction.
@end table

@node Unit Testing, Reference, Extending DejaGnu, Top
@chapter Unit Testing

@menu
* What Is Unit Testing ?::
* The dejagnu.h Header File: The dejagnu_h Header File.
@end menu

@node What Is Unit Testing ?, The dejagnu_h Header File, , Unit Testing
@section What Is Unit Testing ?

Most regression testing as done by DejaGnu is system
testing. This is the complete application is tested all at
once. Unit testing is for testing single files, or small
libraries. In this case, each file is linked with a test case in
C or C++, and each function or class and method is tested in
series, with the test case having to check private data or
global variables to see if the function or method worked.

This works particularly well for testing APIs and at level
where it is easier to debug them, than by needing to trace through
the entire application. Also if there is a specification for the
API to be tested, the testcase can also function as a compliance
test.

@node The dejagnu_h Header File, , What Is Unit Testing ?, Unit Testing
@section The dejagnu.h Header File

DejaGnu uses a single header file to assist in unit
testing. As this file also produces its one test state output,
it can be run standalone, which is very useful for testing on
embedded systems. This header file has a C and C++ API for the
test states, with simple totals, and standardized
output. Because the output has been standardized, DejaGnu can be
made to work with this test case, without writing almost any
Tcl. The library module, dejagnu.exp, will look for the output
messages, and then merge them into DejaGnu's.

@node Reference, Unit Testing API, Unit Testing, Top
@chapter Reference

@menu
* Obtaining DejaGnu::
* Installation::
* Builtin Procedures::
* File Map::
@end menu

@node Obtaining DejaGnu, Installation, , Reference
@section Obtaining DejaGnu

You can obtain DejaGnu from the DejaGnu web site at the
@uref{http://www.gnu.org,Free Software Foundation},
which is at @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/dejagnu/,www.gnu.org/software/dejagnu/  }

@node Installation, Builtin Procedures, Obtaining DejaGnu, Reference
@section Installation

Once you have the DejaGnu source unpacked and available, you must
first configure the software to specify where it is to run (and the
associated defaults); then you can proceed to installing it.

@menu
* Configuring DejaGnu::
* Installing DejaGnu::
@end menu

@node Configuring DejaGnu, Installing DejaGnu, , Installation
@subsection Configuring DejaGnu

It is usually best to configure in a directory separate from the
source tree, specifying where to find the source with the optional
@code{--srcdir} option to
@emph{configure}. DejaGnu uses the GNU
@emph{autoconf} to configure itself. For more info on using
autoconf, read the GNU autoconf manual. To configure, execute the
@file{configure} program, no other options are
required. For an example, to configure in a separate tree for objects,
execute the configure script from the source tree like this:

@example

        ../dejagnu-1.4.5/configure
      
@end example

DejaGnu doesn't care at config time if it's for testing a native
system or a cross system. That is determined at runtime by using the
config files.

You may also want to use the @code{configure} option
@code{--prefix} to specify where you want DejaGnu and its
supporting code installed.  By default, installation is in subdirectories
of @file{/usr/local}, but you can select any alternate
directory @code{altdir} by including
@code{--prefix}@{altdir@}@} on the
@code{configure} command line. (This value is captured in
the Makefile variables @emph{prefix} and
@emph{exec}prefix@}.)

Save for a small number of example tests, the DejaGnu distribution
itself does not include any testsuites; these are available
separately. Testsuites for the GNU development tools are included in
those releases. After configuring the top-level DejaGnu directory, unpack
and configure the test directories for the tools you want to test; then,
in each test directory, run @emph{make check} to build
auxiliary programs required by some of the tests, and run the test
suites.

@node Installing DejaGnu, , Configuring DejaGnu, Installation
@subsection Installing DejaGnu

To install DejaGnu in your filesystem (either in
@file{/usr/local}, or as specified by your
@code{--prefix} option to @emph{configure}),
execute.

@example

        eg$ make install
      
@end example

@emph{make install}does these things for
DejaGnu:

@itemize 

@item
Look in the path specified for executables
@code{$exec_prefix}) for directories called
@file{lib} and @file{bin}. If these
directories do not exist, @emph{make install} creates
them.

@item
Create another directory in the
@file{share} directory, called
@file{dejagnu}, and copy all the library files into
it.

@item
Create a directory in the
@file{dejagnu/share} directory, called
@file{config}, and copy all the configuration files into
it.

@item
Copy the @emph{runtest} shell script into
@file{$exec_prefix/bin}.

@item
Copy @file{runtest.exp} into
@file{$exec_prefix/lib/dejagnu}. This is the main Tcl
code implementing DejaGnu.
@end itemize

@node Builtin Procedures, File Map, Installation, Reference
@section Builtin Procedures

DejaGnu provides these Tcl procedures.

@menu
* Core Internal Procedures::
* Procedures For Remote Communication::
* Procedures For Using Utilities to Connect: connprocs.
* Procedures For Target Boards::
* Target Database Procedures: target database library file.
* Platform Dependent Procedures: platform dependent procedures.
* Utility Procedures::
* Libgloss, A Free BSP: Libgloss.
* Procedures for debugging your Tcl code.: Debugging Procedures.
@end menu

@node Core Internal Procedures, Procedures For Remote Communication, , Builtin Procedures
@subsection Core Internal Procedures

@menu
* Mail_file Procedure: mail_file procedure.
* Open_logs Procedure: open_logs procedure.
* Close_logs Procedure: close_logs procedure.
* Isbuild Procedure: isbuild procedure.
* Is_remote Procedure: is_remote procedure.
* is3way Procedure: is3way procedure.
* Ishost Procedure: ishost procedure.
* Istarget Procedure: istarget procedure.
* Isnative Procedure: isnative procedure.
* Unknown Procedure: unknown procedure.
* Clone_output Procedure: clone_output procedure.
* Reset_vars Procedure: reset_vars procedure.
* Log_and_exit Procedure: log_and_exit procedure.
* Log_summary Procedure: log_summary procedure.
* Cleanup Procedure: cleanup procedure.
* Setup_xfail Procedure: setup_xfail procedure.
* Record_test Procedure: record_test procedure.
* Pass Procedure: pass procedure.
* Fail Procedure: fail procedure.
* Xpass Procedure: xpass procedure.
* Xfail Procedure: xfail procedure.
* Set_warning_threshold Procedure: set_warning_threshold procedure.
* Get_warning_threshold Procedure: get_warning_threshold procedure.
* Warning Procedure: warning procedure.
* Perror Procedure: perror procedure.
* Note Procedure: note procedure.
* Untested Procedure: untested procedure.
* Unresolved Procedure: unresolved procedure.
* Unsupported Procedure: unsupported procedure.
* Init_testcounts Procedure: init_testcounts procedure.
* Incr_count Procedure: incr_count procedure.
* transform Procedure: transform procedure.
* Check_conditional_xfail Procedure: check_conditional_xfail procedure.
* Clear_xfail Procedure: clear_xfail procedure.
* Verbose Procedure: verbose procedure.
* Load_lib Procedure: load_lib procedure.
@end menu

@node mail_file procedure, open_logs procedure, , Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Mail_file Procedure

@quotation

@t{@b{mail_file}(@i{file to
subject});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node open_logs procedure, close_logs procedure, mail_file procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Open_logs Procedure

@quotation

@t{@b{open_logs}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node close_logs procedure, isbuild procedure, open_logs procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Close_logs Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{close_logs}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node isbuild procedure, is_remote procedure, close_logs procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Isbuild Procedure

Tests for a particular build host environment.  If the
currently configured host matches the argument string, the result is
@emph{1}; otherwise the result is
@emph{0}.  @emph{host} must be a full
three-part configure host name; in particular, you may not use the
shorter nicknames supported by configure (but you can use wildcard
characters, using shell syntax, to specify sets of names). If it is
passed a NULL string, then it returns the name of the build canonical
configuration.

@quotation

@t{@b{isbuild}(@i{pattern});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{pattern}
@end table

@node is_remote procedure, is3way procedure, isbuild procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Is_remote Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{is_remote}(@i{board});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node is3way procedure, ishost procedure, is_remote procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection is3way Procedure

Tests for a canadian cross. This is when the tests will be run
on a remotely hosted cross compiler. If it is a canadian cross, then
the result is @emph{1}; otherwise the result is
@emph{0}.

@quotation

@t{@b{is3way}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node ishost procedure, istarget procedure, is3way procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Ishost Procedure

Tests for a particular host environment.  If the currently
configured host matches the argument string, the result is
@emph{1}; otherwise the result is
@emph{0}. @emph{host} must be a full
three-part configure host name; in particular, you may not use the
shorter nicknames supported by configure (but you can use wildcard
characters, using shell syntax, to specify sets of names).

@quotation

@t{@b{ishost}(@i{pattern});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node istarget procedure, isnative procedure, ishost procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Istarget Procedure

Tests for a particular target environment.  If the currently
configured target matches the argument string, the result is
@emph{1} ; otherwise the result is
@emph{0}.  target must be a full three-part configure
target name; in particular, you may not use the shorter nicknames
supported by configure (but you can use wildcard characters, using
shell syntax, to specify sets of names). If it is passed a
@emph{NULL} string, then it returns the name of the
build canonical configuration.

@quotation

@t{@b{istarget}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node isnative procedure, unknown procedure, istarget procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Isnative Procedure

Tests whether the current configuration has the same host and
target. When it runs in a native configuration this procedure returns
a @emph{1}; otherwise it returns a
@emph{0}.

@quotation

@t{@b{isnative}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node unknown procedure, clone_output procedure, isnative procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Unknown Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{unknown}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node clone_output procedure, reset_vars procedure, unknown procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Clone_output Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{clone_output}(@i{message});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{message}
@end table

@node reset_vars procedure, log_and_exit procedure, clone_output procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Reset_vars Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{reset_vars}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node log_and_exit procedure, log_summary procedure, reset_vars procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Log_and_exit Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{log_and_exit}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node log_summary procedure, cleanup procedure, log_and_exit procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Log_summary Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{log_summary}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node cleanup procedure, setup_xfail procedure, log_summary procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Cleanup Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{cleanup}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node setup_xfail procedure, record_test procedure, cleanup procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Setup_xfail Procedure

Declares that the test is expected to fail on a particular set
of configurations.  The config argument must be a list of full
three-part configure target name; in particular, you may not use the
shorter nicknames supported by configure (but you can use the common
shell wildcard characters to specify sets of names).  The
@emph{bugid} argument is optional, and used only in the
logging file output; use it as a link to a bug-tracking system such
as GNATS.

Once you use @code{setup_xfail}, the
@code{fail} and @code{pass} procedures
produce the messages @emph{XFAIL} and
@emph{XPASS} respectively, allowing you to distinguish
expected failures (and unexpected success!) from other test
outcomes.

@quotation

@strong{Warning}

Warning you must clear the expected failure after
using setup_xfail in a test case.  Any call to @code{pass
}or @code{fail} clears the expected failure
implicitly; if the test has some other outcome, e.g. an error, you
can call @code{clear_xfail} to clear the expected
failure explicitly.  Otherwise, the expected-failure declaration
applies to whatever test runs next, leading to surprising
results.
@end quotation

@quotation

@t{@b{setup_xfail}(@i{config}
@i{bugid});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{config}
The config triplet to trigger whether this is an
unexpected or expect failure.

@item @code{bugid}
The optional bugid, used to tie this test case
to a bug tracking system.
@end table

@node record_test procedure, pass procedure, setup_xfail procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Record_test Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{record_test}(@i{type}
@i{message}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{type}

@item @code{message}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node pass procedure, fail procedure, record_test procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Pass Procedure

Declares a test to have passed. @code{pass}
writes in the log files a message beginning with
@emph{PASS} (or @emph{XPASS}, if failure
was expected), appending the argument
@code{string}.

@quotation

@t{@b{pass}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this PASS
message.
@end table

@node fail procedure, xpass procedure, pass procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Fail Procedure

Declares a test to have failed.  @code{fail}
writes in the log files a message beginning with
@emph{FAIL} (or @emph{XFAIL}, if failure
was expected), appending the argument
@code{string}.

@quotation

@t{@b{fail}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this FAIL
message.
@end table

@node xpass procedure, xfail procedure, fail procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Xpass Procedure

Declares a test to have unexpectably passed, when it was
expected to be a failure.  @code{xpass}
writes in the log files a message beginning with
@emph{XPASS} (or @emph{XFAIL}, if failure
was expected), appending the argument
@code{string}.

@quotation

@t{@b{xpass}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this output
state.
@end table

@node xfail procedure, set_warning_threshold procedure, xpass procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Xfail Procedure

Declares a test to have expectably
failed. @code{xfail}
writes in the log files a message beginning with
@emph{XFAIL} (or @emph{PASS}, if success
was expected), appending the argument
@code{string}.

@quotation

@t{@b{xpass}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this output
state.
@end table

@node set_warning_threshold procedure, get_warning_threshold procedure, xfail procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Set_warning_threshold Procedure

Sets the value of @code{warning_threshold}. A value
of @emph{0} disables it: calls to
@code{warning} will not turn a
@emph{PASS} or @emph{FAIL} into an
@emph{UNRESOLVED}.

@quotation

@t{@b{set_warning_threshold}(@i{threshold});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{threshold}
This is the value of the new warning
threshold.
@end table

@node get_warning_threshold procedure, warning procedure, set_warning_threshold procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Get_warning_threshold Procedure

Returns the current value of
@code{@{warning_threshold}. The default value is 3. This
value controls how many @code{warning} procedures can
be called before becoming @emph{UNRESOLVED}.

@quotation

@t{@b{get_warning_threshold}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node warning procedure, perror procedure, get_warning_threshold procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Warning Procedure

Declares detection of a minor error in the test case
itself. @code{warning} writes in the log files a message
beginning with @emph{WARNING}, appending the argument
@code{string}.  Use @code{warning} rather
than @code{perror} for cases (such as communication
failure to be followed by a retry) where the test case can recover from
the error. If the optional @code{number} is supplied,
then this is used to set the internal count of warnings to that
value.

As a side effect, @code{warning_threshold} or more
calls to warning in a single test case also changes the effect of the
next @code{pass} or @code{fail} command:
the test outcome becomes @emph{UNRESOLVED} since an
automatic @emph{PASS} or @emph{FAIL} may
not be trustworthy after many warnings.  If the optional numeric value
is @emph{0}, then there are no further side effects to
calling this function, and the following test outcome doesn't become
@emph{UNRESOLVED}. This can be used for errors with no
known side effects.

@quotation

@t{@b{warning}(@i{string}
@i{number}
);}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}

@item @code{number}
The optional number to set the error counter. This
is only used to fake out the counter when using the
@code{xfail} procedure to control when it flips the
output over to @emph{UNRESOLVED}
state.
@end table

@node perror procedure, note procedure, warning procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Perror Procedure

Declares a severe error in the testing framework
itself. @code{perror} writes in the log files a message
beginning with @emph{ERROR}, appending the argument
@code{string}.

As a side effect, perror also changes the effect of the next
@code{pass} or @code{fail} command: the
test outcome becomes @emph{UNRESOLVED}, since an
automatic @emph{PASS} or @emph{FAIL} cannot
be trusted after a severe error in the test framework.  If the optional
numeric value is @emph{0}, then there are no further side
effects to calling this function, and the following test outcome
doesn't become @emph{UNRESOLVED}. This can be used for
errors with no known side effects.

@quotation

@t{@b{perror}(@i{string}
@i{number}
);}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}

@item @code{number}
The optional number to set the error counter. This
is only used to fake out the counter when using the
@code{xfail} procedure to control when it flips the
output over to @emph{UNRESOLVED}
state.
@end table

@node note procedure, untested procedure, perror procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Note Procedure

Appends an informational message to the log
file. @code{note} writes in the log files a message
beginning with @emph{NOTE}, appending the argument
@code{string}.  Use @code{note}
sparingly. The @code{verbose} should be used for most
such messages, but in cases where a message is needed in the log file
regardless of the verbosity level use @code{note}.

@quotation

@t{@b{note}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this note.
@end table

@node untested procedure, unresolved procedure, note procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Untested Procedure

Declares a test was not run. @code{untested} writes
in the log file a message beginning with @emph{UNTESTED},
appending the argument @emph{string}. For example, you
might use this in a dummy test whose only role is to record that a test
does not yet exist for some feature.

@quotation

@t{@b{untested}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this output
state.
@end table

@node unresolved procedure, unsupported procedure, untested procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Unresolved Procedure

Declares a test to have an unresolved
outcome. @code{unresolved} writes in the log file a
message beginning with @emph{UNRESOLVED}, appending the
argument @emph{string}.  This usually means the test did
not execute as expected, and a human being must go over results to
determine if it passed or failed (and to improve the test case).

@quotation

@t{@b{unresolved}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this output
state.
@end table

@node unsupported procedure, init_testcounts procedure, unresolved procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Unsupported Procedure

Declares that a test case depends on some facility that does not
exist in the testing environment. @code{unsupported}
writes in the log file a message beginning with
@emph{UNSUPPORTED}, appending the argument string.

@quotation

@t{@b{unsupported}(@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{string}
The string to use for this output
state.
@end table

@node init_testcounts procedure, incr_count procedure, unsupported procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Init_testcounts Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{init_testcounts}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node incr_count procedure, transform procedure, init_testcounts procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Incr_count Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{incr_count}(@i{name}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{name}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node transform procedure, check_conditional_xfail procedure, incr_count procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection transform Procedure

Generates a string for the name of a tool as it was configured
and installed, given its native name (as the argument
@code{toolname}). This makes the assumption that all
tools are installed using the same naming conventions: For example,
for a cross compiler supporting the @emph{m68k-vxworks}
configuration, the result of transform @code{gcc} is
@code{m68k-vxworks-gcc}.

@quotation

@t{@b{transform}(@i{toolname});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{toolname}
The name of the cross-development program to
transform.
@end table

@node check_conditional_xfail procedure, clear_xfail procedure, transform procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Check_conditional_xfail Procedure

This procedure adds a conditional xfail, based on compiler
options used to create a test case executable. If an include options
is found in the compiler flags, and it's the right architecture,
it'll trigger an @emph{XFAIL}. Otherwise it'll produce
an ordinary @emph{FAIL}. You can also specify flags to
exclude. This makes a result be a @emph{FAIL}, even if
the included options are found. To set the conditional, set
the variable @code{compiler_conditional_xfail_data} to the
fields 

@example
"[message string] [targets list] [includes
	  list] [excludes list]"
@end example

@noindent
(descriptions below). This is
the checked at pass/fail decision time, so there is no need to call
the procedure yourself, unless you wish to know if it gets
triggered. After a pass/fail, the variable is reset, so it doesn't
effect other tests. It returns @emph{1} if the
conditional is true, or @emph{0} if the conditional is
false.

@quotation

@t{@b{check_conditional_xfail}(@i{message}
@i{targets}
@i{includes}
@i{excludes});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{message}
This is the message to print with the normal test
result.

@item @code{targets}
This is a string with the list targets to activate
this conditional on.

@item @code{includes}
This is a list of sets of options to search for in
the compiler options to activate this conditional.  If the list of
sets of options is empty or if any set of the options matches,
then this conditional is true.  (It may be useful to specify an
empty list of include sets if the conditional is always true
unless one of the exclude sets matches.)

@item @code{excludes}
This is a list of sets of options to search for in
the compiler options to activate this conditional. If any set of
the options matches, (regardless of whether any of the include sets
match) then this conditional is de-activated.
@end table

@strong{Specifying the conditional xfail data}

@example

	  set compiler_conditional_xfail_data @{ \
	       "I sure wish I knew why this was hosed" \
               "sparc*-sun*-* *-pc-*-*" \
               @{"-Wall -v" "-O3"@} \
               @{"-O1" "-Map"@} \
          @}
	  
@end example

What this does is it matches only for these two targets if
"-Wall -v" or  "-O3" is set, but neither "-O1" or "-Map" is set. For
a set to match, the options specified are searched for independently
of each other, so a "-Wall -v" matches either "-Wall -v" or "-v
-Wall". A space separates the options in the string. Glob-style
regular expressions are also permitted.

@node clear_xfail procedure, verbose procedure, check_conditional_xfail procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Clear_xfail Procedure

Cancel an expected failure (previously declared with
@code{setup_xfail}) for a particular set of
configurations.  The @code{config} argument is a list
of configuration target names.  It is only necessary to call
@code{clear_xfail} if a test case ends without calling
either @code{pass} or @code{fail}, after
calling @code{setup_xfail}.

@quotation

@t{@b{clear_xfail}(@i{config});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{config}
The configuration triplets to
clear.
@end table

@node verbose procedure, load_lib procedure, clear_xfail procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Verbose Procedure

Test cases can use this function to issue helpful messages
depending on the number of @code{--verbose} options on the
runtest command line.  It prints string if the value of the variable
@code{verbose} is higher than or equal to the optional
number. The default value for number is @emph{1}.  Use
the optional @code{-log} argument to cause string to always
be added to the log file, even if it won't be printed.  Use the
optional @code{-x} argument to log the test results into
a parsable XML file.  Use the optional @code{-n} argument
to print string without a trailing newline.  Use the optional
@code{--} argument if string begins with "-".

@quotation

@t{@b{verbose}(@i{-log}
@i{-x}
@i{-n}
@i{-r}
@i{string}
@i{number});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{-x}

@item @code{-log}

@item @code{-n}

@item @code{--}

@item @code{string}

@item @code{number}
@end table

@node load_lib procedure, , verbose procedure, Core Internal Procedures
@subsubsection Load_lib Procedure

Loads a DejaGnu library file by searching a fixed path built
into DejaGnu. If DejaGnu has been installed, it looks in a path
starting with the installed library directory.  If you are running
DejaGnu directly from a source directory, without first running
@code{make install}, this path defaults to the current
directory.  In either case, it then looks in the current directory
for a directory called @file{lib}.  If there are
duplicate definitions, the last one loaded takes precedence over the
earlier ones.

@quotation

@t{@b{load_lib}(@i{filespec});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{filespec}
The name of the DejaGnu library file to
load.
@end table

@node Procedures For Remote Communication, connprocs, Core Internal Procedures, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Procedures For Remote Communication

@file{lib/remote.exp} defines these
functions, for establishing and managing communications. Each
of these procedures tries to establish the connection up to
three times before returning. Warnings (if retries will
continue) or errors (if the attempt is abandoned) report on
communication failures.  The result for any of these
procedures is either @emph{-1}, when the
connection cannot be established, or the spawn ID returned by
the Expect command
@code{spawn}.

It use the value of the @code{connect} field
in the @code{target_info} array (was
@code{connectmode} as the type of connection to
make. Current supported connection types are tip, kermit,
telnet, rsh, rlogin, and netdata. If the @code{--reboot}
option was used on the runtest command line, then the target
is rebooted before the connection is made.

@menu
* Call_remote Procedure: call_remote procedure.
* Check_for_board_status Procedure: check_for_board_status procedure.
* File_on_build Procedure: file_on_build procedure.
* File_on_host Procedure: file_on_host procedure.
* Local_exec Procedure: local_exec procedure.
* Remote_binary Procedure: remote_binary procedure.
* Remote_close Procedure: remote_close procedure.
* Remote_download Procedure: remote_download procedure.
* Remote_exec Procedure: remote_exec procedure.
* Remote_expect Procedure: remote_expect procedure.
* Remote_file Procedure: remote_file procedure.
* Remote_ld Procedure: remote_ld procedure.
* Remote_load Procedure: remote_load procedure.
* Remote_open Procedure: remote_open procedure.
* Remote_pop_conn Procedure: remote_pop_conn procedure.
* Remote_push_conn Procedure: remote_push_conn procedure.
* Remote_raw_binary Procedure: remote_raw_binary procedure.
* Remote_raw_close Procedure: remote_raw_close procedure.
* Remote_raw_file Procedure: remote_raw_file procedure.
* remote_raw_ld Procedure: remote_raw_ld procedure.
* Remote_raw_load Procedure: remote_raw_load procedure.
* Remote_raw_open Procedure: remote_raw_open procedure.
* Remote_raw_send Procedure: remote_raw_send procedure.
* Remote_raw_spawn Procedure: remote_raw_spawn procedure.
* Remote_raw_transmit Procedure: remote_raw_transmit procedure.
* Remote_raw_wait Procedure: remote_raw_wait procedure.
* Remote_reboot Procedure: remote_reboot procedure.
* Remote_send Procedure: remote_send procedure.
* Remote_spawn Procedure: remote_spawn procedure.
* Remote_swap_conn Procedure: remote_swap_conn procedure.
* Remote_transmit Procedure: remote_transmit procedure.
* Remote_upload Procedure: remote_upload procedure.
* Remote_wait Procedure: remote_wait procedure.
* Standard_close Procedure: standard_close procedure.
* Standard_download Procedure: standard_download procedure.
* Standard_exec Procedure: standard_exec procedure.
* Standard_file Procedure: standard_file procedure.
* Standard_load Procedure: standard_load procedure.
* Standard_reboot Procedure: standard_reboot procedure.
* Standard_send Procedure: standard_send procedure.
* Standard_spawn Procedure: standard_spawn procedure.
* Standard_transmit Procedure: standard_transmit procedure.
* Standard_upload Procedure: standard_upload procedure.
* Standard_wait Procedure: standard_wait procedure.
* Unix_clean_filename Procedure: unix_clean_filename procedure.
@end menu

@node call_remote procedure, check_for_board_status procedure, , Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Call_remote Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{call_remote}(@i{type}
@i{proc}
@i{dest}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{proc}

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node check_for_board_status procedure, file_on_build procedure, call_remote procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Check_for_board_status Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{check_for_board_status}(@i{variable});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{variable}
@end table

@node file_on_build procedure, file_on_host procedure, check_for_board_status procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection File_on_build Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{file_on_build}(@i{op}
@i{file}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{op}

@item @code{file}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node file_on_host procedure, local_exec procedure, file_on_build procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection File_on_host Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{file_on_host}(@i{op}
@i{file}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{op}

@item @code{file}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node local_exec procedure, remote_binary procedure, file_on_host procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Local_exec Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{local_exec}(@i{commandline}
@i{inp}
@i{outp}
@i{timeout});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{inp}

@item @code{outp}

@item @code{timeout}
@end table

@node remote_binary procedure, remote_close procedure, local_exec procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_binary Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_binary}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node remote_close procedure, remote_download procedure, remote_binary procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_close Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_close}(@i{shellid});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{shellid}
This is the value returned by a call
to @code{remote_open}. This closes the
connection to the target so resources can be used by
others. This parameter can be left off if the
@code{fileid} field in the
@code{target_info} array is set.
@end table

@node remote_download procedure, remote_exec procedure, remote_close procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_download Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_download}(@i{dest}
@i{file}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_exec procedure, remote_expect procedure, remote_download procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_exec Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_exec}(@i{hostname}
@i{program}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{hostname}

@item @code{program}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_expect procedure, remote_file procedure, remote_exec procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_expect Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_expect}(@i{board}
@i{timeout}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{board}

@item @code{timeout}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_file procedure, remote_ld procedure, remote_expect procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_file Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_file}(@i{dest}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_ld procedure, remote_load procedure, remote_file procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_ld Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_ld}(@i{dest}
@i{prog});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{prog}
@end table

@node remote_load procedure, remote_open procedure, remote_ld procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_load Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_load}(@i{dest}
@i{prog}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{prog}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_open procedure, remote_pop_conn procedure, remote_load procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_open}(@i{type});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{type}
This is passed @code{host} or
@code{target}. Host or target refers to
whether it is a connection to a remote target, or a
remote host. This opens the connection to the desired
target or host using the default values in the
configuration system. It returns that
@code{spawn_id} of the process that manages
the connection. This value can be used in
Expect or
@code{exp_send} statements, or passed to
other procedures that need the connection process's
id. This also sets the @code{fileid} field in
the @code{target_info} array.
@end table

@node remote_pop_conn procedure, remote_push_conn procedure, remote_open procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_pop_conn Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_pop_conn}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node remote_push_conn procedure, remote_raw_binary procedure, remote_pop_conn procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_push_conn Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_push_conn}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node remote_raw_binary procedure, remote_raw_close procedure, remote_push_conn procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_binary Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_binary}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node remote_raw_close procedure, remote_raw_file procedure, remote_raw_binary procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_close Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_close}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node remote_raw_file procedure, remote_raw_ld procedure, remote_raw_close procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_file Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_file}(@i{dest}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_raw_ld procedure, remote_raw_load procedure, remote_raw_file procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection remote_raw_ld Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_ld}(@i{dest}
@i{prog});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{prog}
@end table

@node remote_raw_load procedure, remote_raw_open procedure, remote_raw_ld procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_load Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_load}(@i{dest}
@i{prog}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{prog}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_raw_open procedure, remote_raw_send procedure, remote_raw_load procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_open}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_raw_send procedure, remote_raw_spawn procedure, remote_raw_open procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_send Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_send}(@i{dest}
@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{string}
@end table

@node remote_raw_spawn procedure, remote_raw_transmit procedure, remote_raw_send procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_spawn Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_spawn}(@i{dest}
@i{commandline});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{commandline}
@end table

@node remote_raw_transmit procedure, remote_raw_wait procedure, remote_raw_spawn procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_transmit Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_transmit}(@i{dest}
@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}
@end table

@node remote_raw_wait procedure, remote_reboot procedure, remote_raw_transmit procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_raw_wait Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_raw_wait}(@i{dest}
@i{timeout});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{timeout}
@end table

@node remote_reboot procedure, remote_send procedure, remote_raw_wait procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_reboot Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_reboot}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node remote_send procedure, remote_spawn procedure, remote_reboot procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_send Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_send}(@i{dest}
@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{string}
@end table

@node remote_spawn procedure, remote_swap_conn procedure, remote_send procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_spawn Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_spawn}(@i{dest}
@i{commandline}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{commandline}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node remote_swap_conn procedure, remote_transmit procedure, remote_spawn procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_swap_conn Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_swap_conn}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node remote_transmit procedure, remote_upload procedure, remote_swap_conn procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_transmit Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_transmit}(@i{dest}
@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}
@end table

@node remote_upload procedure, remote_wait procedure, remote_transmit procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_upload Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_upload}(@i{dest}
@i{srcfile}
@i{arg});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{srcfile}

@item @code{arg}
@end table

@node remote_wait procedure, standard_close procedure, remote_upload procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Remote_wait Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{remote_wait}(@i{dest}
@i{timeout});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{timeout}
@end table

@node standard_close procedure, standard_download procedure, remote_wait procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_close Procedure

@quotation

@t{@b{standard_close}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node standard_download procedure, standard_exec procedure, standard_close procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_download Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_download}(@i{dest}
@i{file}
@i{destfile});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}

@item @code{destfile}
@end table

@node standard_exec procedure, standard_file procedure, standard_download procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_exec Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_exec}(@i{hostname}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{hostname}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node standard_file procedure, standard_load procedure, standard_exec procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_file Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_file}(@i{dest}
@i{op}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node standard_load procedure, standard_reboot procedure, standard_file procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_load Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_load}(@i{dest}
@i{prog}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{prog}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node standard_reboot procedure, standard_send procedure, standard_load procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_reboot Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_reboot}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node standard_send procedure, standard_spawn procedure, standard_reboot procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_send Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_send}(@i{dest}
@i{string});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{string}
@end table

@node standard_spawn procedure, standard_transmit procedure, standard_send procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_spawn Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_spawn}(@i{dest}
@i{commandline});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{commandline}
@end table

@node standard_transmit procedure, standard_upload procedure, standard_spawn procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_transmit Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_transmit}(@i{dest}
@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}
@end table

@node standard_upload procedure, standard_wait procedure, standard_transmit procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_upload Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_upload}(@i{dest srcfile destfile});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{srcfile}

@item @code{destfile}
@end table

@node standard_wait procedure, unix_clean_filename procedure, standard_upload procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Standard_wait Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{standard_wait}(@i{dest}
@i{timeout});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{timeout}
@end table

@node unix_clean_filename procedure, , standard_wait procedure, Procedures For Remote Communication
@subsubsection Unix_clean_filename Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{unix_clean_filename}(@i{dest}
@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}
@end table

@node connprocs, Procedures For Target Boards, Procedures For Remote Communication, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Procedures For Using Utilities to Connect

telnet, rsh, tip, kermit

@menu
* telnet Procedure: telnet procedure.
* rsh Procedure: rsh procedure.
* Tip Procedure: tip procedure.
* Kermit Procedure: kermit procedure.
* kermit_open Procedure: kermit_open procedure.
* Kermit_command Procedure: kermit_command procedure.
* Kermit_send Procedure: kermit_send procedure.
* Kermit_transmit Procedure: kermit_transmit procedure.
* Telnet_open Procedure: telnet_open procedure.
* Telnet_binary Procedure: telnet_binary procedure.
* Telnet_transmit Procedure: telnet_transmit procedure.
* Tip_open Procedure: tip_open procedure.
* Rlogin_open Procedure: rlogin_open procedure.
* Rlogin_spawn Procedure: rlogin_spawn procedure.
* Rsh_open Procedure: rsh_open procedure.
* Rsh_download Procedure: rsh_download procedure.
* Rsh_upload Procedure: rsh_upload procedure.
* Rsh_exec Procedure: rsh_exec procedure.
* Ftp_open Procedure: ftp_open procedure.
* Ftp_upload Procedure: ftp_upload procedure.
* Ftp_download Procedure: ftp_download procedure.
* Ftp_close Procedure: ftp_close procedure.
* Tip_download Procedure: tip_download procedure.
@end menu

@node telnet procedure, rsh procedure, , connprocs
@subsubsection telnet Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{telnet}(@i{hostname}
@i{port});}
@end quotation

@quotation

@t{@b{rlogin}(@i{hostname});}
@end quotation

@node rsh procedure, tip procedure, telnet procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection rsh Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{rsh}(@i{hostname});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{hostname}
This refers to the IP address or name
(for example, an entry in
@file{/etc/hosts}) for this target. The
procedure names reflect the Unix utility used to
establish a connection. The optional
@code{port} is used to specify the IP
port number. The value of the
@code{netport} field in the
@code{target_info} array is used. (was
@code{$netport}) This value has two parts,
the hostname and the port number, separated by a
@emph{:}. If host or target is used in
the @code{hostname} field, than the
config array is used for all information.
@end table

@node tip procedure, kermit procedure, rsh procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Tip Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{tip}(@i{port});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{port}
Connect using the Unix utility
@code{tip}. @code{Port}must
be a name from the tip
configuration file
@file{/etc/remote}. Often, this is called
@code{hardwire}, or something like
@code{ttya}. This file holds all the
configuration data for the serial port. The value of
the @code{serial} field in the
@code{target_info} array is used. (was
@code{$serialport}) If @code{host}
or @code{target} is used in the
@code{port} field, than the config
array is used for all information. the
config array is used for all information.
@end table

@node kermit procedure, kermit_open procedure, tip procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Kermit Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{kermit}(@i{port}
@i{bps});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{port}
Connect using the program
@code{kermit}. @code{Port}
is the device name,
e.g. @file{/dev/ttyb}.

@item @code{bps}
@code{bps} is the line
speed to use (in its per second) for the
connection. The value of the @code{serial}
field in the @code{target_info} array is
used.  (was @code{$serialport}) If
@code{host} or @code{target} is
used in the @code{port} field, than the
config array is used for all information. the
config array is used for all information.
@end table

@node kermit_open procedure, kermit_command procedure, kermit procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection kermit_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{kermit_open}(@i{dest}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node kermit_command procedure, kermit_send procedure, kermit_open procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Kermit_command Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{kermit_command}(@i{dest}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node kermit_send procedure, kermit_transmit procedure, kermit_command procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Kermit_send Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{kermit_send}(@i{dest string args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{string}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node kermit_transmit procedure, telnet_open procedure, kermit_send procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Kermit_transmit Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{kermit_transmit}(@i{dest}
@i{file}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node telnet_open procedure, telnet_binary procedure, kermit_transmit procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Telnet_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{telnet_open}(@i{hostname}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{hostname}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node telnet_binary procedure, telnet_transmit procedure, telnet_open procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Telnet_binary Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{telnet_binary}(@i{hostname});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{hostname}
@end table

@node telnet_transmit procedure, tip_open procedure, telnet_binary procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Telnet_transmit Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{telnet_transmit}(@i{dest}
@i{file}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{file}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node tip_open procedure, rlogin_open procedure, telnet_transmit procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Tip_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{tip_open}(@i{hostname});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{hostname}
@end table

@node rlogin_open procedure, rlogin_spawn procedure, tip_open procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Rlogin_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{rlogin_open}(@i{arg});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{arg}
@end table

@node rlogin_spawn procedure, rsh_open procedure, rlogin_open procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Rlogin_spawn Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{rlogin_spawn}(@i{dest}
@i{cmdline});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{dest}

@item @code{cmdline}
@end table

@node rsh_open procedure, rsh_download procedure, rlogin_spawn procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Rsh_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{rsh_open}(@i{hostname});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{hostname}
@end table

@node rsh_download procedure, rsh_upload procedure, rsh_open procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Rsh_download Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{rsh_download}(@i{desthost}
@i{srcfile}
@i{destfile});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{desthost}

@item @code{srcfile}

@item @code{destfile}
@end table

@node rsh_upload procedure, rsh_exec procedure, rsh_download procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Rsh_upload Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{rsh_upload}(@i{desthost}
@i{srcfile}
@i{destfile});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{desthost}

@item @code{srcfile}

@item @code{destfile}
@end table

@node rsh_exec procedure, ftp_open procedure, rsh_upload procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Rsh_exec Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{rsh_exec}(@i{boardname}
@i{cmd}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{boardname}

@item @code{cmd}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node ftp_open procedure, ftp_upload procedure, rsh_exec procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Ftp_open Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{ftp_open}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node ftp_upload procedure, ftp_download procedure, ftp_open procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Ftp_upload Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{ftp_upload}(@i{host}
@i{remotefile}
@i{localfile});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}

@item @code{remotefile}

@item @code{localfile}
@end table

@node ftp_download procedure, ftp_close procedure, ftp_upload procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Ftp_download Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{ftp_download}(@i{host}
@i{localfile}
@i{remotefile});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}

@item @code{localfile}

@item @code{remotefile}
@end table

@node ftp_close procedure, tip_download procedure, ftp_download procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Ftp_close Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{ftp_close}(@i{host});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{host}
@end table

@node tip_download procedure, , ftp_close procedure, connprocs
@subsubsection Tip_download Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{tip_download}(@i{spawnid}
@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{spawnid}
Download @code{file} to the
process @code{spawnid} (the value returned
when the connection was established), using the
@code{~put} command under
tip.  Most often used for
single board computers that require downloading
programs in ASCII S-records.  Returns
@emph{1} if an error occurs,
@emph{0} otherwise.

@item @code{file}
This is the filename to
download.
@end table

@node Procedures For Target Boards, target database library file, connprocs, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Procedures For Target Boards


@menu
* Default_link Procedure: default_link procedure.
* Default_target_assemble Procedure: default_target_assemble procedure.
* default_target_compile Procedure: default_target_compile procedure.
* Pop_config Procedure: pop_config procedure.
* Prune_warnings Procedure: prune_warnings procedure.
* Push_build Procedure: push_build procedure.
* push_config Procedure: push_config procedure.
* Reboot_target Procedure: reboot_target procedure.
* Target_assemble Procedure: target_assemble procedure.
* Target_compile Procedure: target_compile procedure.
@end menu

@node default_link procedure, default_target_assemble procedure, , Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Default_link Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{default_link}(@i{board}
@i{objects}
@i{destfile}
@i{flags});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{board}

@item @code{objects}

@item @code{destfile}

@item @code{flags}
@end table

@node default_target_assemble procedure, default_target_compile procedure, default_link procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Default_target_assemble Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{default_target_assemble}(@i{source}
@i{destfile}
@i{flags});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{source}

@item @code{destfile}

@item @code{flags}
@end table

@node default_target_compile procedure, pop_config procedure, default_target_assemble procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection default_target_compile Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{default_target_compile}(@i{source}
@i{destfile}
@i{type}
@i{options});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{source}

@item @code{destfile}

@item @code{type}

@item @code{options}
@end table

@node pop_config procedure, prune_warnings procedure, default_target_compile procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Pop_config Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{pop_config}(@i{type});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{type}
@end table

@node prune_warnings procedure, push_build procedure, pop_config procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Prune_warnings Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{prune_warnings}(@i{text});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{text}
@end table

@node push_build procedure, push_config procedure, prune_warnings procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Push_build Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{push_build}(@i{name});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{name}
@end table

@node push_config procedure, reboot_target procedure, push_build procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection push_config Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{push_config}(@i{type}
@i{name});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{type}

@item @code{name}
@end table

@node reboot_target procedure, target_assemble procedure, push_config procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Reboot_target Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{reboot_target}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node target_assemble procedure, target_compile procedure, reboot_target procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Target_assemble Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{target_assemble}(@i{source destfile flags});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{source}

@item @code{destfile}

@item @code{flags}
@end table

@node target_compile procedure, , target_assemble procedure, Procedures For Target Boards
@subsubsection Target_compile Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{target_compile}(@i{source}
@i{destfile}
@i{type}
@i{options});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{source}

@item @code{destfile}

@item @code{type}

@item @code{options}
@end table

@node target database library file, platform dependent procedures, Procedures For Target Boards, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Target Database Procedures

@menu
* Board_info Procedure: board_info procedure.
* Host_info Procedure: host_info procedure.
* Set_board_info Procedure: set_board_info procedure.
* Set_currtarget_info Procedure: set_currtarget_info procedure.
* Target_info Procedure: target_info procedure.
* Unset_board_info Procedure: unset_board_info procedure.
* Unset_currtarget_info Procedure: unset_currtarget_info procedure.
* Push_target Procedure: push_target procedure.
* Pop_target Procedure: poptarget procedure.
* List_targets Procedure: list_targets procedure.
* Push_host Procedure: push_host procedure.
* Pop_host Procedure: pop_host procedure.
* Compile Procedure: compile procedure.
* Archive Procedure: archive procedure.
* Ranlib Procedure: ranlib procedure.
* Execute_anywhere Procedure: execute_anywhere procedure.
@end menu

@node board_info procedure, host_info procedure, , target database library file
@subsubsection Board_info Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{board_info}(@i{machine}
@i{op}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{machine}

@item @code{op}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node host_info procedure, set_board_info procedure, board_info procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Host_info Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{host_info}(@i{op}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{op}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node set_board_info procedure, set_currtarget_info procedure, host_info procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Set_board_info Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{set_board_info}(@i{entry}
@i{value});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{entry}

@item @code{value}
@end table

@node set_currtarget_info procedure, target_info procedure, set_board_info procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Set_currtarget_info Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{set_currtarget_info}(@i{entry}
@i{value});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{entry}

@item @code{value}
@end table

@node target_info procedure, unset_board_info procedure, set_currtarget_info procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Target_info Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{target_info}(@i{op}
@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{op}

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node unset_board_info procedure, unset_currtarget_info procedure, target_info procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Unset_board_info Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{unset_board_info}(@i{entry});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{entry}
@end table

@node unset_currtarget_info procedure, push_target procedure, unset_board_info procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Unset_currtarget_info Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{unset_currtarget_info}(@i{entry});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{entry}
@end table

@node push_target procedure, poptarget procedure, unset_currtarget_info procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Push_target Procedure

This makes the target named @emph{name} be the
current target connection. The value of @emph{name} is
an index into the @code{target_info} array and is set in
the global config file.

@quotation

@t{@b{push_target}(@i{name});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{name}
The name of the target to make current
connection.
@end table

@node poptarget procedure, list_targets procedure, push_target procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Pop_target Procedure

This unsets the current target connection.

@quotation

@t{@b{pop_target}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node list_targets procedure, push_host procedure, poptarget procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection List_targets Procedure

This lists all the supported targets for this
architecture.

@quotation

@t{@b{list_targets}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node push_host procedure, pop_host procedure, list_targets procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Push_host Procedure

This makes the host named @emph{name} be the
current remote host connection. The value of
@emph{name} is an index into the
@code{target_info} array and is set in the global config
file.

@quotation

@t{@b{push_host}(@i{name});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{name}
@end table

@node pop_host procedure, compile procedure, push_host procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Pop_host Procedure

This unsets the current host connection.

@quotation

@t{@b{pop_host}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node compile procedure, archive procedure, pop_host procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Compile Procedure

This invokes the compiler as set by CC to compile the
file @file{file}. The default options for many cross
compilation targets are @emph{guessed} by DejaGnu, and
these options can be added to by passing in more parameters as
arguments to @code{compile}. Optionally, this will also
use the value of the @emph{cflags} field in the target
config array. If the host is not the same as the build machines, then
then compiler is run on the remote host using
@code{execute_anywhere}.

@quotation

@t{@b{compile}(@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{file}
@end table

@node archive procedure, ranlib procedure, compile procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Archive Procedure

This produces an archive file. Any parameters passed to
@code{archive} are used in addition to the default
flags. Optionally, this will also use the value of the
@emph{arflags} field in the target config array. If the
host is not the same as the build machines, then then archiver is run
on the remote host using @code{execute_anywhere}.

@quotation

@t{@b{archive}(@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{file}
@end table

@node ranlib procedure, execute_anywhere procedure, archive procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Ranlib Procedure

This generates an index for the archive file for systems that
aren't POSIX yet. Any parameters passed to @code{ranlib}
are used in for the flags.

@quotation

@t{@b{ranlib}(@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{file}
@end table

@node execute_anywhere procedure, , ranlib procedure, target database library file
@subsubsection Execute_anywhere Procedure

This executes the @emph{cmdline} on the proper
host. This should be used as a replacement for the Tcl command
@code{exec} as this version utilizes the target config
info to execute this command on the build machine or a remote
host. All config information for the remote host must be setup to
have this command work. If this is a canadian cross, (where we test a
cross compiler that runs on a different host then where DejaGnu is
running) then a connection is made to the remote host and the command
is executed there. It returns either REMOTERROR (for an error) or the
output produced when the command was executed. This is used for
running the tool to be tested, not a test case.

@quotation

@t{@b{execute_anywhere}(@i{cmdline});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{cmdline}
@end table

@node platform dependent procedures, Utility Procedures, target database library file, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Platform Dependent Procedures

Each combination of target and tool requires some
target-dependent procedures.  The names of these procedures have
a common form: the tool name, followed by an underbar
@emph{_}, and finally a suffix describing the
procedure's purpose.  For example, a procedure to extract the
version from GDB is called
@code{gdb_version}.

@code{runtest} itself calls only two of these
procedures, @code{$@{tool@}_exit} and
@code{$@{tool@}_version}; these procedures use no
arguments.

The other two procedures, @code{$@{tool@}_start}
and @code{$@{tool@}_load}@}, are only called by the test
suites themselves (or by testsuite-specific initialization
code); they may take arguments  or not, depending on the
conventions used within each testsuite.

The usual convention for return codes from any of these
procedures (although it is not required by
@code{runtest}) is to return @emph{0}
if the procedure succeeded, @emph{1} if it failed,
and @emph{-1} if there was a communication error.

@menu
* $@{tool@}_start Procedure: $@{tool@}_start procedure.
* $@{tool@}_load Procedure: $@{tool@}_load procedure.
* $@{tool@}_exit Procedure: $@{tool@}_exit procedure.
* $@{tool@}_version Procedure: $@{tool@}_version procedure.
@end menu

@node $@{tool@}_start procedure, $@{tool@}_load procedure, , platform dependent procedures
@subsubsection $@{tool@}_start Procedure

Starts a particular tool.  For an interactive tool,
@code{$@{tool@}_start} starts and initializes the
tool, leaving the tool up and running for the test cases; an
example is @code{gdb_start}, the start function
for GDB. For a batch oriented tool,
@code{$@{tool@}_start} is optional; the recommended
convention is to let @code{$@{tool@}_start} run the
tool, leaving the output in a variable called
@code{comp_output}.  Test scripts can then analyze
@code{$comp_output} to determine the test results.
An example of this second kind of start function is
@code{gcc_start}, the start function for GCC.

DejaGnu itself does not call
@code{$@{tool@}_start}.  The initialization
module @code{$@{tool@}_init.exp} must call
@code{$@{tool@}_start} for interactive tools;
for batch-oriented tools, each individual test script calls
@code{$@{tool@}_start} (or makes other
arrangements to run the tool).

@quotation

@t{@b{$@{tool@}_start}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node $@{tool@}_load procedure, $@{tool@}_exit procedure, $@{tool@}_start procedure, platform dependent procedures
@subsubsection $@{tool@}_load Procedure

Loads something into a tool. For an interactive tool,
this conditions the tool for a particular test case; for
example, @code{gdb_load} loads a new
executable file into the debugger. For batch oriented tools,
@code{$@{tool@}_load} may do nothing---though,
for example, the GCC support uses
@code{gcc_load} to load and run a binary on
the target environment.  Conventionally,
@code{$@{tool@}_load} leaves the output of any
program it runs in a variable called
@code{$exec_output}. Writing
@code{$@{tool@}_load} can be the most complex
part of extending DejaGnu to a new tool or a new target, if
it requires much communication coding or file
downloading. Test scripts call
@code{$@{tool@}_load}.

@quotation

@t{@b{$@{tool@}_load}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node $@{tool@}_exit procedure, $@{tool@}_version procedure, $@{tool@}_load procedure, platform dependent procedures
@subsubsection $@{tool@}_exit Procedure

Cleans up (if necessary) before DejaGnu exits. For
interactive tools, this usually ends the interactive
session.  You can also use @code{$@{tool@}_exit}
to remove any temporary files left over from the
tests. @code{runtest} calls
@code{$@{tool@}_exit}.

@quotation

@t{@b{$@{tool@}_exit}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node $@{tool@}_version procedure, , $@{tool@}_exit procedure, platform dependent procedures
@subsubsection $@{tool@}_version Procedure

Prints the version label and number for
@code{$@{tool@}}.  This is called by the DejaGnu
procedure that prints the final summary report.  The output
should consist of the full path name used for the tested
tool, and its version number.

@quotation

@t{@b{$@{tool@}_version}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node Utility Procedures, Libgloss, platform dependent procedures, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Utility Procedures

@menu
* Getdirs Procedure: getdirs procedure.
* Find Procedure: find procedure.
* Which Procedure: which procedure.
* Grep Procedure: grep procedure.
* Prune Procedure: prune procedure.
* Slay Procedure: slay procedure.
* Absolute Procedure: absolute procedure.
* Psource Procedure: psource procedure.
* Runtest_file_p Procedure: runtest_file_p procedure.
* Diff Procedure: diff procedure.
* Setenv Procedure: setenv procedure.
* unsetenv Procedure: unsetenv procedure.
* Getenv Procedure: getenv procedure.
* Prune_system_crud Procedure: prune_system_crud procedure.
@end menu

@node getdirs procedure, find procedure, , Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Getdirs Procedure

Returns a list of all the directories in the single
directory a single directory that match an optional
pattern. 

@quotation

@t{@b{getdirs}(@i{rootdir}
@i{pattern});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}

@item @code{pattern}
If you do not specify
@code{pattern},
@code{Getdirs} assumes a default pattern of
@emph{*}. You may use the common shell
wildcard characters in the pattern. If no directories
match the pattern, then a NULL string is
returned.
@end table

@node find procedure, which procedure, getdirs procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Find Procedure

Search for files whose names match @emph{pattern}
(using shell wildcard characters for filename expansion).  Search
subdirectories recursively, starting at
@emph{rootdir}. The result is the list of files whose
names match; if no files match, the result is empty.  Filenames in the
result include all intervening subdirectory names. If no files match
the pattern, then a NULL string is returned.

@quotation

@t{@b{find}(@i{rootdir}
@i{pattern});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{rootdir}
The top level directory to search the search
from.

@item @code{pattern}
A csh "glob" style regular expression representing
the files to find.
@end table

@node which procedure, grep procedure, find procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Which Procedure

Searches the execution path for an executable file
@emph{binary}, like the BSD @code{which}
utility.  This procedure uses the shell environment variable
@emph{PATH}. It returns @emph{0} if the
binary is not in the path, or if there is no @emph{PATH}
environment variable. If @code{binary} is in the path, it
returns the full path to @code{binary}.

@quotation

@t{@b{which}(@i{file});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{binary}
The executable program or shell script to look
for.
@end table

@node grep procedure, prune procedure, which procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Grep Procedure

Search the file called @file{filename} (a fully
specified path) for lines that contain a match for regular expression
@emph{regexp}. The result is a list of all the lines that
match.  If no lines match, the result is an empty string.  Specify
@emph{regexp} using the standard regular expression style
used by the Unix utility program grep.

Use the optional third argument @emph{line} to
start lines in the result with the line number in
@file{filename}.  (This argument is simply an option
flag; type it just as shown @code{--line}.)

@quotation

@t{@b{grep}(@i{filename}
@i{regexp}
@i{--line});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{filename}
The file to search.

@item @code{regexp}
The Unix style regular expression (as used by the
@code{grep} Unix utility) to search
for.

@item @code{--line}
Prefix the line number to each line where the
regexp matches.
@end table

@node prune procedure, slay procedure, grep procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Prune Procedure

This procedure is deprecated and will be removed in
the next release of DejaGnu.  If a testsuite uses this
procedure, a copy of the procedure should be made and placed
in the lib directory of the testsuite.

@node slay procedure, absolute procedure, prune procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Slay Procedure

This procedure is deprecated and will be removed in
the next release of DejaGnu.  If a testsuite uses this
procedure, a copy of the procedure should be made and placed
in the lib directory of the testsuite.

@node absolute procedure, psource procedure, slay procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Absolute Procedure

This procedure is deprecated and will be removed in
the next release of DejaGnu.  If a testsuite uses this
procedure, a copy of the procedure should be made and placed
in the lib directory of the testsuite.

@node psource procedure, runtest_file_p procedure, absolute procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Psource Procedure

This procedure is deprecated and will be removed in
the next release of DejaGnu.  If a testsuite uses this
procedure, a copy of the procedure should be made and placed
in the lib directory of the testsuite.

@node runtest_file_p procedure, diff procedure, psource procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Runtest_file_p Procedure

Search @emph{runtest}s for
@emph{testcase} and return @emph{1} if
found, @emph{0} if not. @emph{runtests}
is a list of two elements.  The first is a copy of what was on
the right side of the @emph{=} if 

@example
foo.exp="..."
@end example

@noindent
" was specified, or
an empty string if no such argument is present. The second is the
pathname of the current testcase under consideration. This is used
by tools like compilers where each testcase is a file.

@quotation

@t{@b{runtest_file_p}(@i{runtests}
@i{testcase});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{runtests}
The list of patterns to compare against.

@item @code{testcase}
The test case filename.
@end table

@node diff procedure, setenv procedure, runtest_file_p procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Diff Procedure

Compares the two files and returns a @emph{1} if
they match, or a @emph{0} if they don't. If
@code{verbose} is set, then it'll print the differences to
the screen.

@quotation

@t{@b{diff}(@i{file_1}
@i{file_2});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{file_1}
The first file to compare.

@item @code{file_2}
The second file to compare.
@end table

@node setenv procedure, unsetenv procedure, diff procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Setenv Procedure

Sets the environment variable @emph{var} to the
value @emph{val}.

@quotation

@t{@b{setenv}(@i{var}
@i{val});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{var}
The environment variable to set.

@item @code{val}
The value to set the variable to.
@end table

@node unsetenv procedure, getenv procedure, setenv procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection unsetenv Procedure

Unsets the environment variable
@emph{var}.

@quotation

@t{@b{unsetenv}(@i{var});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{var}
The environment variable to
unset.
@end table

@node getenv procedure, prune_system_crud procedure, unsetenv procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Getenv Procedure

Returns the value of @emph{var} in the
environment if it exists, otherwise it returns NULL.

@quotation

@t{@b{getenv}(@i{var});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{var}
The environment variable to get the value
of.
@end table

@node prune_system_crud procedure, , getenv procedure, Utility Procedures
@subsubsection Prune_system_crud Procedure

For system @emph{system}, delete text the host or
target operating system might issue that will interfere with pattern
matching of program output in @emph{text}.  An example
is the message that is printed if a shared library is out of
date.

@quotation

@t{@b{prune_system_crud}(@i{system}
@i{test});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{system}
The system error messages to look for to screen out
.

@item @code{text}
The Tcl variable containing the
text.
@end table

@node Libgloss, Debugging Procedures, Utility Procedures, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Libgloss, A Free BSP

Libgloss is a free @dfn{BSP} (Board Support
Package) commonly used with GCC and G++ to produce a fully linked
executable image for an embedded systems.

@menu
* Libgloss_link_flags Procedure: libgloss_link_flags procedure.
* Libgloss_include_flags Procedure: libgloss_include_flags procedure.
* Newlib_link_flags Procedure: newlib_link_flags procedure.
* Newlib_include_flags Procedure: newlib_include_flags procedure.
* Libio_include_flags Procedure: libio_include_flags procedure.
* Libio_link_flags Procedure: libio_link_flags procedure.
* G++_include_flags Procedure: g++_include_flags procedure.
* G++_link_flags Procedure: g++_link_flags procedure.
* Libstdc++_include_flags Procedure: libstdc++_include_flags procedure.
* Libstdc++_link_flags Procedure: libstdc++_link_flags procedure.
* Get_multilibs Procedure: get_multilibs procedure.
* Find_binutils_prog Procedure: find_binutils_prog procedure.
* Find_gcc Procedure: find_gcc procedure.
* Find_gcj Procedure: find_gcj procedure.
* Find_g++ Procedure: find_g++ procedure.
* Find_g77 Procedure: find_g77 procedure.
* Process_multilib_options Procedure: process_multilib_options procedure.
* Add_multilib_option Procedure: add_multilib_option procedure.
* Find_gas Procedure: find_gas procedure.
* Find_ld Procedure: find_ld procedure.
* Build_wrapper Procedure: build_wrapper procedure.
* Winsup_include_flags Procedure: winsup_include_flags procedure.
* Winsup_link_flags Procedure: winsup_link_flags procedure.
@end menu

@node libgloss_link_flags procedure, libgloss_include_flags procedure, , Libgloss
@subsubsection Libgloss_link_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{libgloss_link_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node libgloss_include_flags procedure, newlib_link_flags procedure, libgloss_link_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Libgloss_include_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{libgloss_include_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node newlib_link_flags procedure, newlib_include_flags procedure, libgloss_include_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Newlib_link_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{newlib_link_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node newlib_include_flags procedure, libio_include_flags procedure, newlib_link_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Newlib_include_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{newlib_include_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node libio_include_flags procedure, libio_link_flags procedure, newlib_include_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Libio_include_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{libio_include_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node libio_link_flags procedure, g++_include_flags procedure, libio_include_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Libio_link_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{libio_link_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node g++_include_flags procedure, g++_link_flags procedure, libio_link_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection G++_include_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{g++_include_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node g++_link_flags procedure, libstdc++_include_flags procedure, g++_include_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection G++_link_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{g++_link_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node libstdc++_include_flags procedure, libstdc++_link_flags procedure, g++_link_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Libstdc++_include_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{libstdc++_include_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node libstdc++_link_flags procedure, get_multilibs procedure, libstdc++_include_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Libstdc++_link_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{libstdc++_link_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node get_multilibs procedure, find_binutils_prog procedure, libstdc++_link_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Get_multilibs Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{get_multilibs}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node find_binutils_prog procedure, find_gcc procedure, get_multilibs procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Find_binutils_prog Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{find_binutils_prog}(@i{name});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{name}
@end table

@node find_gcc procedure, find_gcj procedure, find_binutils_prog procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Find_gcc Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{find_gcc}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node find_gcj procedure, find_g++ procedure, find_gcc procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Find_gcj Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{find_gcj}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node find_g++ procedure, find_g77 procedure, find_gcj procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Find_g++ Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{find_g++}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node find_g77 procedure, process_multilib_options procedure, find_g++ procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Find_g77 Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{find_g77}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node process_multilib_options procedure, add_multilib_option procedure, find_g77 procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Process_multilib_options Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{process_multilib_options}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node add_multilib_option procedure, find_gas procedure, process_multilib_options procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Add_multilib_option Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{add_multilib_option}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node find_gas procedure, find_ld procedure, add_multilib_option procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Find_gas Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{find_gas}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node find_ld procedure, build_wrapper procedure, find_gas procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Find_ld Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{find_ld}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node build_wrapper procedure, winsup_include_flags procedure, find_ld procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Build_wrapper Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{build_wrapper}(@i{gluefile});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{gluefile}
@end table

@node winsup_include_flags procedure, winsup_link_flags procedure, build_wrapper procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Winsup_include_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{winsup_include_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node winsup_link_flags procedure, , winsup_include_flags procedure, Libgloss
@subsubsection Winsup_link_flags Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{winsup_link_flags}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node Debugging Procedures, , Libgloss, Builtin Procedures
@subsection Procedures for debugging your Tcl code.

@file{lib/debugger.exp}defines these utility
procedures:

@menu
* Dumpvars Procedure: dumpvars procedure.
* Dumplocals Procedure: dumplocals procedure.
* Dumprocs Procedure: dumprocs procedure.
* Dumpwatch Procedure: dumpwatch procedure.
* Watcharray Procedure: watcharray procedure.
* Watchvar Procedure: watchvar procedure.
* Watchunset Procedure: watchunset procedure.
* Watchwrite Procedure: watchwrite procedure.
* Watchread Procedure: watchread procedure.
* Watchdel Procedure: watchdel procedure.
* Print Procedure: print procedure.
* Quit Procedure: quit procedure.
@end menu

@node dumpvars procedure, dumplocals procedure, , Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Dumpvars Procedure

This takes a csh style regular expression (glob rules) and prints
the values of the global variable names that match.  It is abbreviated
as @emph{dv}.

@quotation

@t{@b{dumpvars}(@i{vars});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{vars}
The variables to dump.
@end table

@node dumplocals procedure, dumprocs procedure, dumpvars procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Dumplocals Procedure

This takes a csh style regular expression (glob rules) and
prints the values of the local variable names that match. It is
abbreviated as @emph{dl}.

@quotation

@t{@b{dumplocals}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node dumprocs procedure, dumpwatch procedure, dumplocals procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Dumprocs Procedure

This takes a csh style regular expression (glob rules) and
prints the body of all procs that match. It is abbreviated as
@emph{dp}.

@quotation

@t{@b{dumprocs}(@i{pattern});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{pattern}
The csh "glob" style pattern to look
for.
@end table

@node dumpwatch procedure, watcharray procedure, dumprocs procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Dumpwatch Procedure

This takes a csh style regular expression (glob rules) and
prints all the watchpoints. It is abbreviated as
@emph{dw}.

@quotation

@t{@b{dumpwatch}(@i{pattern});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{pattern}
The csh "glob" style pattern to look
for.
@end table

@node watcharray procedure, watchvar procedure, dumpwatch procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Watcharray Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{watcharray}(@i{element}
@i{type});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{type}
The csh "glob" style pattern to look
for.
@end table

@node watchvar procedure, watchunset procedure, watcharray procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Watchvar Procedure


@quotation

@t{@b{watchvar}(@i{var}
@i{type});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node watchunset procedure, watchwrite procedure, watchvar procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Watchunset Procedure

This breaks program execution when the variable
@code{var} is unset. It is abbreviated as
@emph{wu}.

@quotation

@t{@b{watchunset}(@i{arg});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node watchwrite procedure, watchread procedure, watchunset procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Watchwrite Procedure

This breaks program execution when the variable
@code{var} is written. It is abbreviated as
@emph{ww}.

@quotation

@t{@b{watchwrite}(@i{var});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{var}
The variable to watch.
@end table

@node watchread procedure, watchdel procedure, watchwrite procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Watchread Procedure

This breaks program execution when the variable
@code{var} is read. It is abbreviated as
@emph{wr}.

@quotation

@t{@b{watchread}(@i{var});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{var}
The variable to watch.
@end table

@node watchdel procedure, print procedure, watchread procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Watchdel Procedure

This deletes a watchpoint from the watch list. It is
abbreviated as @emph{wd}.

@quotation

@t{@b{watchdel}(@i{args});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{args}
@end table

@node print procedure, quit procedure, watchdel procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Print Procedure

This prints the value of the variable
@code{var}. It is abbreviated as
@emph{p}.

@quotation

@t{@b{print}(@i{var});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{var}
@end table

@node quit procedure, , print procedure, Debugging Procedures
@subsubsection Quit Procedure

This makes runtest exit. It is abbreviated as
@emph{q}.

@quotation

@t{@b{quit}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@table @asis

@item @code{}
@end table

@node File Map, , Builtin Procedures, Reference
@section File Map

This is a map of the files in DejaGnu.

@itemize 

@item
runtest

@item
runtest.exp

@item
stub-loader.c

@item
testglue.c

@item
config

@item
baseboards

@item
lib/debugger.exp

@item
lib/dg.exp

@item
lib/framework.exp

@item
lib/ftp.exp

@item
lib/kermit.exp

@item
lib/libgloss.exp

@item
lib/mondfe.exp

@item
lib/remote.exp

@item
lib/rlogin.exp

@item
lib/rsh.exp

@item
lib/standard.exp

@item
lib/target.exp

@item
lib/targetdb.exp

@item
lib/telnet.exp

@item
lib/tip.exp

@item
lib/util-defs.exp

@item
lib/utils.exp

@item
lib/xsh.exp

@item
lib/dejagnu.exp
@end itemize

@node Unit Testing API, , Reference, Top
@chapter Unit Testing API

@menu
* C Unit Testing API::
* C++ Unit Testing API::
@end menu

@node C Unit Testing API, C++ Unit Testing API, , Unit Testing API
@section C Unit Testing API

All of the functions that take a
@code{msg} parameter use a C char * that is
the message to be displayed. There currently is no support for
variable length arguments.

@menu
* Pass Function: pass function.
* Fail Function: fail function.
* Untested Function: untested function.
* Unresolved Function: unresolved function.
* Totals Function: totals function.
@end menu

@node pass function, fail function, , C Unit Testing API
@subsection Pass Function

This prints a message for a successful test
completion.

@quotation

@t{@b{pass}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node fail function, untested function, pass function, C Unit Testing API
@subsection Fail Function

This prints a message for an unsuccessful test
completion.

@quotation

@t{@b{fail}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node untested function, unresolved function, fail function, C Unit Testing API
@subsection Untested Function

This prints a message for an test case that isn't run
for some technical reason.

@quotation

@t{@b{untested}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node unresolved function, totals function, untested function, C Unit Testing API
@subsection Unresolved Function

This prints a message for an test case that is run,
but there is no clear result. These output states require a
human to look over the results to determine what happened.

@quotation

@t{@b{unresolved}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node totals function, , unresolved function, C Unit Testing API
@subsection Totals Function

This prints out the total numbers of all the test
state outputs.

@quotation

@t{@b{totals}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@node C++ Unit Testing API, , C Unit Testing API, Unit Testing API
@section C++ Unit Testing API

All of the methods that take a
@code{msg} parameter use a C char *
or STL string, that is the message to be
displayed. There currently is no support for variable
length arguments.

@menu
* Pass Method: pass method.
* Fail Method: fail method.
* Untested Method: untested method.
* Unresolved Method: unresolved method.
* Totals Method: totals method.
@end menu

@node pass method, fail method, , C++ Unit Testing API
@subsection Pass Method

This prints a message for a successful test
completion.

@quotation

@t{@b{TestState::pass}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node fail method, untested method, pass method, C++ Unit Testing API
@subsection Fail Method

This prints a message for an unsuccessful test
completion.

@quotation

@t{@b{TestState::fail}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node untested method, unresolved method, fail method, C++ Unit Testing API
@subsection Untested Method

This prints a message for an test case that isn't run
for some technical reason.

@quotation

@t{@b{TestState::untested}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node unresolved method, totals method, untested method, C++ Unit Testing API
@subsection Unresolved Method

This prints a message for an test case that is run,
but there is no clear result. These output states require a
human to look over the results to determine what happened.

@quotation

@t{@b{TestState::unresolved}(@i{msg});}
@end quotation

@node totals method, , unresolved method, C++ Unit Testing API
@subsection Totals Method

This prints out the total numbers of all the test
state outputs.

@quotation

@t{@b{TestState::totals}(@i{});}
@end quotation

@bye
