@c -*- texinfo -*-
@chapter ANNOUNCE
@ifset TEXT-ONLY
@include version.texi
@end ifset

This is version @value{GNUSTEP-GUI-VERSION} of the GNUstep GUI library (@samp{gnustep-gui}).

@section What is the GNUstep GUI Library?

It is a library of graphical user interface classes written completely 
in the Objective-C language; the classes are based upon 
Apple's Cocoa framework (which came from the OpenStep
specification as release by NeXT Software, Inc).  The library has been
enhanced in a number of ways to take advantage of the GNU system.  
These classes include graphical objects such as buttons, text fields, 
popup lists, browser lists, and windows; there are also many associated 
classes for handling events, colors, fonts, pasteboards and images.

The GNUstep GUI Library is designed in two parts.  The first part is the
front-end component which is independent of platform and display system.
This front-end is combined with a back-end component which handles all of
the display system dependent such as specific calls to X/Windows.  This
design allows the GNUstep applications to have the "look and feel" of
the underlying display system without any changes to the application, and
the library can be easily ported to other display systems.

The GNUstep GUI Library requires the GNU Objective-C compiler, the
GNUstep Base Library, the TIFF Graphics library, and a back-end
component like the GNUstep 'Back' Backend.

@set ANNOUNCE-ONLY
@include news.texi
@clear ANNOUNCE-ONLY

@section Where can you get it?  How can you compile it?

@ifset GNUSTEP-GUI-FTP-MACHINE
The gstep-gui-@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-VERSION}.tar.gz distribution
file has been placed at @url{ftp://@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-FTP-MACHINE}/@value{GNUSTEP-GUI-FTP-DIRECTORY}}.
@end ifset

Read the INSTALL file or the GNUstep-HOWTO for installation instructions.

@section Where do I send bug reports?

Please log bug reports on the GNUstep project page
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnustep} or send
bug reports to @email{bug-gnustep@@gnu.org}.

@section Obtaining GNU Software

Check out the GNUstep web site. (@url{http://www.gnustep.org/}), and
the GNU web site. (@url{http://www.gnu.org/})


