.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Southern Storm Software, Pty Ltd.
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.TH treecc 1 "19 June 2001" "Southern Storm Software" ""
.SH NAME
treecc \- tree compiler-compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ll +8
.B treecc
[ options ]
.I input
\&...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Treecc
converts input files in the treecc syntax into source
code that permits creating and walking abstract syntax trees.
It is intended for use in developing compilers, in concert with
existing tools such as \fBlex\fR(1) and \fByacc\fR(1).
The treecc syntax is described in the \fBtreecc\fR texinfo
topic.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-o \fIfile\fB, \-\-output \fIfile\fR
Set the name of the output file.  If this option is not supplied,
then the name of the first input file will be used, with its
extension changed to ".c".  If the input is stdin, the default
output file is "yy_tree.c".

This option may be overridden using the "%output" keyword in
the input files.
.TP
.B \-h \fIfile\fB, \-\-header \fIfile\fR
Set the name of the header output file.  This is only used for
the C and C++ languages.  If this option is not supplied,
then the name of the output file will be used, with its extension
changed to ".h".  If the input is stdin, the default header output
file is "yy_tree.h".

This option may be overriden using the "%header" keyword in the
input files.

If this option is used with a language that does not require
headers, it will be ignored.
.TP
.B \-d \fIdir\fB, \-\-output\-dir \fIdir\fR
Set the name of the Java output directory.  This is only used for
the Java language.  If this option is not supplied, then the directory
corresponding to the first input file is used.  If the input is stdin,
the default is the current directory.

This option may be overriden using the "%outdir" keyword in the
input files.

If this option is used with a language other than Java, it will be ignored.
.TP
.B \-e \fIext\fB, \-\-extension \fIext\fR
Change the default output file extension to \fIext\fR, instead of
".c".  The value \fIext\fR can have a leading dot, but this is
not required.
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-force\-create
\fBTreecc\fR attempts to optimise the creation of output files
so that they are only modified if a non-trivial change has
occurred in the input.  This can reduce the number of source
code recompiles when \fBtreecc\fR is used in combination
with \fBmake\fR(1).

This option forces the output files to be created, even if they
are the same as existing files with the same name.

The directive "%option force" can be used in the input files
to achieve the same effect as this option.
.TP
.B \-O \fIopt\fB, \-\-option \fIopt\fR
Set a treecc option value.  This is a command-line version of
the "%option" keyword in the input files.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-no\-output
Suppress the generation of output files.  \fBTreecc\fR parses the
input files, checks for errors, and then stops.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print a usage message for the \fBtreecc\fR program.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Print the version of the \fBtreecc\fR program.
.TP
.B \-\-
Marks the end of the command-line options, and the beginning of
the input filenames.  You may need to use this if your filename
begins with '-'.  e.g. "treecc -- -input.tc".  This is not needed
if the input is stdin: "treecc -" is perfectly valid.
.SH "AUTHOR"
Written by Southern Storm Software, Pty Ltd.

http://www.southern-storm.com.au/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lex(1), yacc(1), make(1)
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
Exit status is 1 if an error occurred while processing the input.
Otherwise the exit status is 0.
